Registering Performance
Use of the Clicker
When introducing the clicker to a client the instructor should inform them of these following two concepts:
1.    Obviously there is a quantitative measure associated with the clicker and we record the number of repetitions performed.  But what should be emphasized here is that only worthy repetitions are recorded.  As discussed throughout the manual, the focus of our protocol is on the quality of the execution not on the weight lifted or the number of reps.  Yes, those are important elements but they should never be the concern of the client.
Few, if any, repetitions are ever truly perfect.  But within some degree of reasonableness, clients should expect to perform at a certain standard of quality.  This will be highly individual based on the abilities and motor skill of the client but the same concept applies.  At the very least, all repetitions should be within the 6-10 second window on the positive phase and 6-10 second window for the negative.  And all subjects should be held to the standard of performing reps uniformly; meaning, keeping the same pace throughout without any sudden movement or stalling.  Add to this the minimum requirement of breathing freely and maintaining a neutral head position (4 "P's") and this becomes the framework for which all clients should strive to perform from a qualitative perspective.
Make them aware that you are only accepting and recording “perfect” repetitions.  Let them know that allowing anything outside of these minimum qualitative parameters is potentially unsafe during the actual performance but also from a progression standpoint.  If you accept these less than optimal reps, there is a likelihood that they would accumulate enough reps to warrant a weight increase.  And with the subpar execution that they are currently using, an increase in weight is only going to exacerbate the situation.
Importantly, we will only record the number of full repetitions completed with acceptable form.  In the event that an instructor has a client perform partial repetitions, only those deemed to be full range of motion will be recorded.  This is a critical concept to understand because any progressions in load should be based solely on full repetitions.  It is therefore imperative for the instructor to observe closely to determine what constitutes a full range of motion for every client on each exercise.  This range of motion will likely vary from client to client and from machine to machine.
2.    Another and potentially even more beneficial use of the clicker is as an audible command at the upper turnaround.  As discussed earlier, there are several instances where the exercise calls for a pause or a squeeze.  There are others that require the subject to simply “pass through” the change of direction in a continuous fashion.  Often, a subject lingers too long in the upper turnaround of a compound pressing and/or prematurely releases the squeeze of a compound pulling or rotary-form movement.
Over time the client should learn to expect a delayed click and that they should either deliberately pause or actively squeeze depending on the exercise.  They will then most likely stay engaged in that part of the movement and subsequently release into the negative better.
As an instructor you will learn to better watch for the squeeze (or pause) and how long to delay the “click”.  You will learn to observe the contracting anatomy and the compression of the pads on the movement arm and your timing and cueing will become progressively refined.  Do not click until you have instructed and determined that the client has achieved peak force production and has the requisite neutral head and relaxed face and jaw.
In addition to the use of the clicker another important aspect of recording performance has to do with equipment settings and recording results.  Consistency among trainers with equipment settings and the standardization of exercise chart nomenclature are required for meaningful comparison and progression of exercise performance between workouts.  As part of an instructor’s orientation should be the memorization and understanding of all equipment settings, modifications, and notations on exercise charts.