Exercise Variety
Purpose
There is a commonly held belief in the fitness world that exercises need to be constantly varied to “keep the body guessing” or to “confuse the muscles” in order to make progress.  What many fail to realize is that by constantly changing exercises, the body never gets a chance to actually adapt and grow from the stimulus imposed.
Remember that exercise, or more specifically the mechanical tension experienced during exercise, provides the stimulus not the benefit.  The adaptation comes about through repeated bouts of a progressively more intense stimulus on specific muscle fibers.  And this happens only after an exercise is learned and mastered and properly progressed.  Variation lends itself to confusion as well as the inability to accurately chart and record performance, which makes true progression more complicated to achieve.
When new exercises are introduced, many subjects will mistake apparent strength improvements for what is actually a learning effect or neurological adaptations.  This learning effect is comprised of general familiarity with the equipment and methods plus increased proficiency in motor skill.  This learning effect must be maximized and engrained first before any true muscular strength adaptation can take place.  This is the primary reason for the need for non-variation in exercise.
Obviously, there is value for some variation in a workout program.  And most subjects will benefit from very slight adjustments in exercises like a gradual increase in the stretched positions or changing the grip/hand position.  But what the client should understand is that the basic A routine (generic routine) includes the most effective exercises, involving the largest muscles, most easily learned, and the easiest to standardize and record and therefore progress.  It is also the foundation for most advanced level trainees.  And the benefit will be more fully realized when the subject learns to perform the exercises with perfect execution, deep concentration, and an ever increasing intensity.
Our "generic routine" is applicable to essentially our entire client base that we will service. This is also known as the "big 5" in our industry and is comprised of a horizontal push and pull (so chest press and compound row), a vertical push and pull (overhead press and pulldown), and a leg press. These five exercises alone will target (and therefore stimulate) most of the major muscular structures of the body, especially for newer trainees. As a subject gets more advanced, a more specialized selection of targeted exercises should be considered including single joint or unilateral movements.