Firming, Toning, and Flexibility
Purpose
Often a new client will come to MaxStrength Fitness with a goal of either “firming”, “toning”, or becoming more flexible in general or for a specific area of the body.  This section is included in the manual to provide the instructor with the knowledge to be able to have an intelligent and informative discussion with these clients.
Firming
For subjects that have a goal of firming up an area, it is important for them to realize that to firm any area of the body requires one or most likely both of these two changes:
Stronger and larger muscles
Decreased body fat
Stronger and larger muscles come about through proper resistance training.  A reduction of body fat is almost entirely a dietary issue; yet the general population refuses to give up the notion of exercising for fat loss.
Toning
This word is a form of the proper biological term: tonus.  Tonus is the residual tension in a skeletal muscle when at rest. The following statements provide general facts about tonus:
Tonus decreases as a muscle weakens.
And the converse is that as a muscle strengthens, its tonus increases.
Again the case is made as with “firming” that proper resistance training will help to achieve this desired result.
Flexibility
Flexibility is an overrated aspect of fitness.  This is because the importance and benefits of muscular strength are underrated, poorly understood, and somewhat feared.  But it is unnecessary, even undesirable, to promote flexibility beyond that required for functional motion in daily activity.  To reiterate what we learned earlier, although not all exercises provide an extreme degree of stretch, the range of motion over which most exercises are performed greatly exceeds that which the involved joints move through during normal daily activities.  Resistance training performed over a full range of motion provides all the flexibility needed for the majority of activities.
This is not to dismiss stretching altogether as there can be a benefit to careful stretching of a chronically tight muscle or muscle group. This can often times provide relief in the moment. But what actually occurs is more of an allowance or tolerance of the muscle to elongate. It is also interesting to note that generally strengthening an area or movement pattern will allow for more apparent "flexibility". This is because the body has become stronger and can achieve those positions or ranges of motion that were not previously attainable due to a lack of strength.
See further insight in the Benefits of Resistance Training module:
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ICgOmhQl_tt7xbwr94lzzBN-u203IzgB8zDohvDFFfQ/edit?usp=drive_link