Resistance Transfer Techniques
Interpersonal Loading Transfers
There are several instances during the course of a workout where there will require a transfer of resistance between the instructor and the subject.  These will primarily be the Cervical Extension, Compound Row, Pulldown, Pullover, and Abdominals.  These movements require a cooperative technique between the two that must be led and directed by the instructor to ensure a safe transfer of load.
During a loading transfer, the instructor must first bring the movement arm into position, which is usually the midpoint on most exercises.  The instructor then guides the client to engage the movement arm with the proper part of the body. After affirming proper alignment with the machine, the trainer will instruct the client to begin applying gradual force to the movement arm while the trainer begins to lessen his or her force.  The instructor then gradually “hands off” the resistance entirely to the client and pinpoints the completion of the transfer with a clear, concise signal of “yours”.
This should be rehearsed between instructors as many times as is necessary before it is used with a client to ensure mastery.  The movement arm should be held absolutely still during the transfer and the instructor must not give the signal until the transfer is complete.  Both of these factors must be understood by the instructor and the client as there is a potential for injury during this action.
After the transfer is complete, the subject begins by moving into the stretch or negative phase of the exercise for most of the movements.  The first repetition then begins after the subject has completed the lower turnaround.
Interpersonal Unloading Transfers
The exact same concepts apply as in the loading transfer above except this time the resistance is transferred from the subject to the instructor or unloaded.  This technique will most likely only be used on the Cervical Extension exercise; however, it is quite possibly even more important to master for safety purposes.
This transfer should also take place at or about the midpoint of the exercise (i.e. neutral head and neck).  The instructor should also be careful not to abruptly take the load from the client but rather gradually transfer it away from them.  The signal given as the transfer back to the instructor takes place is simply, “that is…mine”.  It is also critical for the instructor to make sure both feet are firmly planted so as not to get caught off-guard during the transfer.  You must be mentally and physically active with the timing of the transfer; providing verbal direction and sensing pressure changes in the movement arm.