FUNDAMENTALS OF
HIGH INTENSITY  EXERCISE
Introduction
If you’ve engaged in a program of fitness that focuses on aerobic activity, such as walking on a treadmill, using an elliptical machine, jogging, spinning, or any low-intensity activity involving the repetitive use of your lower body, you’ve  been wasting much of your time.  Or possibly you’ve tried the more full body trends of crossfit, orange theory, or any number of available bootcamps.  And while these concepts at least attempt to devote some attention to strength training, they involve a lot of high risk lifts performed in a fatigued state.  Not only are these programs not sustainable for most, they can actually be dangerous and injurious.  Not to mention that in terms of direct strength training, these methods fall drastically short of optimizing the stimulus as they are geared more toward creating fatigue through discomfort.
For many decades, we have been fed the notion that aerobic conditioning is the answer to all your fitness questions, and that the best way to achieve such conditioning is to engage in steady-state (i.e. cardiovascular) activities. However, this is only one singular factor of physical fitness out of a great many potential benefits of a properly conducted training program.  This is also true of yoga, Pilates, and similar disciplines, which tend to ascribe some higher value to extreme flexibility.  What  people should seek is a program of conditioning that would involve total fitness, including all of the potential benefits of exercise and not just a portion of those benefits.
At the source of the problem is a serious misunderstanding in the fitness world concerning not only what type of  exercise people should do but also how much time should be devoted to such exercise.  An overriding “more is better”  philosophy has been the edifice on which most fitness premises are built.  Instead of approaching the solution with a perspective of “how much is necessary” we tend to believe “how much can I handle” will
best provide the results we are seeking.  But this philosophy is misapplied because beyond a certain amount, exercise can become detrimental.
Proper exercise, prescribed in the correct dosage, can lead to total fitness. But any amount beyond the minimum  necessary will have a negative result.  And as it turns out, the amount of volume of exercise required to produce results isn’t anywhere close to the amount we’ve been led to believe.  Especially from the standpoint of strength training.
There’s no doubt that being in good physical condition is an absolute requirement for living an active, healthy, and happy life;  however it is neither necessary nor desirable to do any more dedicated exercise than is minimally necessary to achieve this (we are not referring to recreation here).  And the  best type of exercise for this purpose is a progressive, high-intensity, controlled pace strength building exercise program.
One of the keys to productive strength-building exercise is that it must be of a particular intensity level to elicit a meaningful response, or adaptation, from the body.  If your exercise intensity is too low, you won’t reach the minimum threshold necessary to stimulate physical changes.  Intensity is one of the three key principles of any exercise program, the other two being volume and frequency.
Intensity can be described as the percentage of momentary effort exerted, or more simply, how hard you are working in the moment.  Brief activity, causing task failure within 30-seconds to 2-minutes, qualifies as high-intensity.  In fact, the more intense the effort, the lower the volume (or duration) of exercise that can be tolerated or that is needed.
The following chart illustrates the inverse relationship between volume and intensity and can be seen as a spectrum of various levels of activity.  A single vertical line would indicate an activity with a certain proportion of volume and intensity:
The Inverse Relationship Between Volume and Intensity
The rectangle is divided diagonally with volume in the blue half and intensity in the orange. The vertical lines at either end of the spectrum illustrate the inverse relationship of the 2 principles: more intensity (orange) on the right side and more volume (blue) on the left.
As any vertical line is moved to the left, the less intense the work is and a greater amount of volume will be possible and tolerable.  Conversely, if we select a level of effort that is more towards the right side of the spectrum, the intensity of the work is increased, and as a result the volume must decrease accordingly.  A common example to help illustrate this premise is to consider sprinting vs. walking.  We humans can walk for hours if needed and be able to maintain our pace with almost no challenge.  But a true, all-out effort sprint might only last 10 to 20 seconds before our intensity (i.e. output) decreases.
Now, most of us have experienced or can imagine an intense activity where as we reach certain levels of output, our protective instincts ultimately cause us to decide to limit our efforts (i.e. Perception of Effort).  Fortunately, with the kind of exercise environment offered by a clinically-styled facility, with medically-based exercise machines, and an instructor qualified to assist your efforts, the risk of potential danger is negated allowing for the kind of intensity described throughout the MSF curriculum (and regular, supervised training will allow us to better tolerate these higher efforts).  When we can ensure a high level of safety, along with a high level of efficiency, a high-intensity resistance training program will be the most effective type of exercise for anyone.  Strength and muscle are the keys to active longevity and MSF is well-equipped to deliver just that to our communities.
Unfortunately, most people believe that exercise has to be a long and arduous endeavor.  Most who attempt to exercise do an excessive amount of volume, they do it too often, and they do not work intensely  enough—i.e. they would fall more to the left side of the spectrum above.  This kind of activity is mostly nonproductive, causes harmful wear and  tear, and can be extremely time consuming.  In other words, there’s a large investment of resources with very little payoff or return.  Realize that not having enough time is the number-one reported excuse for people not exercising on a regular  basis.
Fortunately, when we perform high-intensity exercise, it must also be time-efficient.  The more we move toward the right side of the chart above, the higher the quality (intensity) of work and the less of it we can tolerate.  As it happens, this kind of  exercise is also the most productive or stimulative.  When training properly—brief but intensely—progress should be notable and optimal results should be forthcoming.
In fact, such proper strength training is a powerful therapeutic modality—so much so that it must go through a similar consideration of determining optimum dosage amount and frequency that is used by researchers when developing a new drug.  We should  be able to produce a prescription-like recommendation of exercise for the majority of the population, one that can be used to adjust dosage and  frequency for a wide spectrum of subjects, from the very weak to the powerfully strong.  But as is commonly experienced in the medical realm, doctors tend to give very broad and under-dosed recommendations for exercise, that often include only walking or basic daily movement.
In order to competently recommend (prescribe) exercise, there needs to be an understanding of the basic biological process of exercise.
The Biological Basis of Exercise
To begin with, we need to consider that the human body is an organism that is able to make adaptive responses to stimuli in the environment.  Though exercise is only a stimulus, we tend to think of exercise as something that directly causes a favorable response; i.e., “the abdominal machine will give us great abs.”
In reality, it is the body, not the exercise (or exercise machine), that produces the improvement.  In fact, from your body’s perspective, exercise is actually a negative because it threatens our movement.
And movement is our most preserved biological function.  As Dr. Doug McGuff likes to remind us, without movement, we cannot get food or keep from becoming food.  This is why the body is forced to adapt—it’s a response to something it considers a threat to its survival.
With this basic understanding in mind, here is the simple equation we must consider when determining an exercise prescription:
We should approach exercise from the following biological standpoint: we are trying to create a threatening (but safe) stimulus that will cause your body (a living organism) to adapt and produce a desired response.  The response is necessary to protect the organism during possible future exposures to the threatening stimulus.
In the field of exercise, there are many theories as to what approach best produces the stimulus.  The most accurate depiction of hypertrophy is best explained by the Stimulating Reps Model of Hypertrophy put forth by physiologist Chris Beardsley.  This is the only hypertrophy model that [1] uses well-established physiological concepts (e.g. the size principle, the force-velocity and length-tension relationships, and fatigue mechanisms) to explain how a hypertrophy stimulus is applied to muscle fibers, and that [2] explains all known training variables.  See more on these topics here https://www.patreon.com/c/sandcresearch/posts?
Under the stimulating reps model, the key stimulus we seek is mechanical tension.  Mechanical tension is produced/experienced by the active muscle fibers in a muscular contraction.  Importantly however, it is not enough for a muscle fiber to simply be active to experience stimulative levels of tension.
It is also that the tension results from a high level effort and a slow contraction velocity, which happens as we approach concentric failure on an exercise.  With this understanding of mechanical tension, we can standardize intensity.  If each subject works to task failure (or as hard as can be expected), we can be  reasonably accurate in our record-keeping and prescribe exercise that is truly progressive and productive.
Our basic equation now looks like this:
In considering this equation, the amount of time it takes for the post-workout fatigue to clear while not extending too far out from the period of elevated muscle protein synthesis (MPS) from the workout dictates an optimum frequency.  As stated above, we desire to optimize intensity so that a minimum exercise volume will produce the stimulus, thereby minimizing fatigue.  A simple rule to gauge recovery would be whether or not soreness is present (this is to be avoided as it is NOT stimulative) and whether or not progressive overload is occurring at some regular interval.  Considering that typical MPS elevations last upwards of 48 to 72 hours [REFERENCE] after a stimulative bout of exercise, and based on the recovery factors discussed above, the stimulus (the relative values of intensity, volume and frequency) can be  conscientiously prescribed.
Importantly, it’s not how much exercise your body can withstand, but rather how much is actually required to affect change.  In other words, we want to optimize the timing and magnitude of the stimulus while keeping fatigue to a minimum to ensure recovery.
Since we are attempting to standardize intensity by training to concentric failure, or more accurately termed ‘task failure’, the next  variable to standardize would be the volume of work.  As we discussed above, most people perform far too much exercise, and certainly too much to qualify as high-intensity.  Remember, the higher the exercise intensity the lower the volume must be.
In general, MSF recommends 5-8 exercises, properly performed on equipment that tracks muscle and joint function.  This will usually take anywhere between 20 to 30 minutes.  If the intensity of the work is adequate, 5 or so exercises will stimulate most of the major muscular structures of the body.  Especially for more novice subjects (by way of Regional Hypertrophy).  Advanced trainees will likely require more exercises to better stimulate the different regions of muscle.  Each of  the 5-8 sets of exercise will last between 1 and 3 minutes, depending on your experience, age, personality, tolerance, and skill level among other attributes.  We use specially designed machines to efficiently, effectively, and safely deliver the stimulus to your body, abiding by the MSF Continuous Tension protocol.
With this protocol, we can standardize the way in which we administer the stimulus and can ensure a level of precision in our  measurements. The Continuous Tension method uses a 6-10 second lifting or positive phase, and  a 6-10  second lowering or negative phase.  Ideally, we will use the same pace for both directions, which will result in a smooth, continuous motion.  This helps to minimize momentum so that every second of every repetition represents effective and efficient muscular loading.  Along with a 6-10 second pace, we use a window of 6-10 repetitions to failure as being the ideal loading for most subjects.
Levels of Strength (Phases of a Repetition)
In attempting to prescribe the intensity of the effort of exercise, we must first understand that there are three levels of strength.  Importantly, these levels of strength correspond to the three general phases of a repetition; namely the concentric or lifting phase, the eccentric or lowering phase, and a static or “holding” phase.
These three phases are arranged in hierarchical levels, from concentric being the weakest to eccentric as the strongest.
It may not be immediately obvious but your positive/lifting strength is actually your weakest level of strength.  As you perform an  exercise, you will get to a point in the set when you cannot lift the weight anymore.  It is at this point (and most often prior to this point) that a majority of subjects will reduce their effort or stop entirely.
And while this can be expected as our protective instincts begin to take over, it by no means signals an inability to continue producing force.  In fact this is where it is in the subject’s best interest to begin working even harder to continue positive movement.  Once positive movement actually ceases, you’ve only utilized the first level of strength.
At this point, when you can no longer lift the weight concentrically, you can still hold the weight motionless.  This is the next level of strength, the static  phase.  Again, it’s not something you’d be compelled to do automatically because your body is giving you many signals to  stop, especially as a result of not being able to move.  However, your actual strength potential is greater in the static  phase than in the positive phase.  Simply, you’re strong enough to continue working to attempt positive motion.  This will result in a static effort that comes with more mechanical tension.
When gravity begins to take over and you can no longer even hold the weight in place, you still have the strength to control the weight slowly, lowering without free-falling.  This is the negative phase, your strongest level of strength.  Rather than  dropping the weight or lowering it abruptly (as your instincts would have you do) you should resist every moment of the  lowering phase, all the way to the end, with all you’ve got.  When the negative phase is completed, you’re finally through and have reached the end of muscular failure.  And more importantly, you’ve maximized the amount of mechanical tension (stimulus) you can create on that exercise.
Now one of the more interesting elements to this discussion of levels of strength and effort, is that your tolerance to training will improve with practice.  Simply stated, you will get better at training with more effort, the more you train, as long as the intent is there.
Strength vs. Resistance (During a Single Set)
This next chart represents a single set of an exercise with an arbitrary 2-minute duration.  This graphic representation illustrates the change in our strength and effort over the course of a set of resistance training.
100
The Duration (the amount of time the set lasts) is indicated by the horizontal X-axis, and Units of Strength are indicated  by the vertical Y-axis. The bars on the graph show the number of units of force from 0 to 100. The grey bars represent the machine’s resistance (selected weight) and the blue bars represent the subject’s strength. Each pairing of blue and grey bars reflect a stage of progression as your musculature progressively fatigues.
Stage 1 - Set begins
At the beginning of the set, the subject starts with a baseline of 100 units of fresh strength (blue bar).  The instructor has selected 75 units of resistance (grey bar) on the machine to oppose your strength.
For a stimulative level tension to be created in a reasonable amount of time (and thereby minimizing fatigue), the resistance on the machine must be meaningful.  75-80% of your starting strength capability represents a meaningful resistance.  If resistance is too light, the slow-twitch muscle fibers can begin to recover at a faster rate than they fatigue, only prolonging the set and diminishing the stimulus.  If resistance is too heavy, there is an additional risk of form discrepancies with excessive loading.
From the starting point, using the MSF Continuous Tension protocol, we aim for a gradual build up of force just to begin the movement.  This should take anywhere from 3 to 5 seconds of increasing effort, attempting to apply just enough force to crack the weight stack.  This is done primarily for safety but also to take advantage of the sequential nature of our motor unit recruitment pattern (Henneman’s Size Principle).
Once the movement has begun, we will look to move at a slow, controlled pace of somewhere between 6-10 seconds for both the concentric and eccentric phases.  Importantly, we strive to keep the same pace at all times in both directions.  This is a key component of our protocol and will dictate the required level of effort in the moment (more insight on this in the following stages).
Stage 2 - Strength diminishes
With each passing moment under load, the subject’s strength diminishes by way of increasing fatigue and there are no longer 100 units of strength available (blue bar is slowly dropping).  But the subject is still stronger than the 75 units of resistance (grey bar remains the same throughout the set obviously).
After about 60 or 80 seconds, we can expect that the subject has become quite a bit weaker.  Instinctively, our bodies try to avoid these situations.  The instructor will encourage the subject to work harder in an effort to maintain their pace.  In other words, as fatigue sets in, effort must increase proactively to avoid bogging down prematurely.  Again, the pace will determine the effort.
Another repetition or so and the difficulty quickly increases as the movement starts to involuntarily slow down.  The 75 units of resistance that originally felt moderately heavy, now feels significantly heavier.  If the subject is training properly and receiving timely instruction, their effort should approach maximal at this point.
More importantly, we now have the two components required for a stimulative magnitude of mechanical tension-high level of effort with involuntary slowing of the contraction velocity.
Stage 3 - Concentric Failure
As one approaches this stage, and assuming they are properly motivated and their effort is properly directed, it may take upwards of 10 or more seconds to complete the concentric phase of a rep.
Fatigue has mounted to the extent that the subject can now only produce 75 units of force with a maximal effort and the movement ceases.  This is concentric failure-the load can no longer be moved in a positive direction.  Most training subjects never truly reach this stage as it comes with a certain amount of discomfort and is not instinctively tolerated by the nervous system.
Stage 4 - Set Ends
At this point, strength has dropped to levels below the machine’s resistance, but importantly, the subject’s strength has not diminished completely.  It is in the subject’s best interest to continue maintaining the highest level of effort possible.  Despite not being able to move the machine, the subject can still continue to add tension to the targeted muscles.  Tension does not require movement, only effort.
The instructor will encourage the subject to continue working in a positive direction and then likely begin to count down while the subject uses whatever amount of strength they have remaining.  As the subject reaches their maximum tolerable perception of effort, they will work to lower the weights on the negative with as much control as they can muster, creating even more mechanical tension in the process.
In some cases, if the subject has truly used every bit of strength they had during the final concentric attempt, the eccentric portion of the last rep may be hard to control and there is a chance that it nearly gets away from them.  This can still be done with control because of the physiological explanation of the levels of strength above.
By using every ounce of available strength on each set and allowing the instructor to guide them through the process, the subject can ensure that a stimulative effort was given, with only one set of exercise.  With this approach, we are minimizing fatigue, which allows for more of the body’s resources to be used for building strength and muscle, which is the desired, qualitative outcome.  It is not necessarily attached to some predetermined quantitative goal.
This process will be repeated for each of the remaining exercises prescribed in the workout with the highest, qualitative effort, resulting in an optimal stimulus to fatigue ratio being the goal for each exercise.
This high intensity effort represents a serious threat to your body because it is not aware that you are in a controlled, supervised workout environment using resistance machines.  For all it knows, you were wrestling with a wild animal for your life.  While this may seem extreme, it is nonetheless the reality.  To the body, this was all just a stressful metabolic experience, and at the end of that experience it could not move against the resistance.  This  becomes a profound stimulus to your body that, if performed consistently over time, will produce an adaptive response.
The response is that the body eventually builds more strength and muscle so that it is more capable the next time the stimulus is presented.  Instead of 100 units of strength, your body builds to 110 units.  Of course, in expectation of this, the instructor may add more resistance (80 units vs. 75) to compensate for the new strength.
It must be stated here that the increase in resistance is not a requirement.  In fact, a stimulus can be created using the same load for an extended period of time.  Remember, for a stimulus to be possible, we need a high level of effort combined with involuntary slowing of the contraction speed of the muscle (or slowing of the implement being lifted).  What the instructor will consider however, is whether the resistance appears “too heavy” or “too light”.  Again, in keeping with our preferred loading parameters, our sets should typically land in the 6-10 repetition range.  There is further discussion of these factors throughout our technical manual, the MSF Academy.
The Importance of Recovery Management
The adaptive response to high intensity resistance training is a metabolically expensive one that requires time for the body to replenish the resources that were consumed to make the adaptation.  It also comes with a certain amount of fatigue and inflammation that need to clear to give the nervous system the “green light” to permit that required level of effort again.  If we administer the stimulus again before your body has completed this process, we will greatly diminish the stimulus, essentially creating more fatigue without the benefit.  This requires a judicious approach to exercise programming, which is another competitive advantage of the MSF Continuous Tension protocol.
Knowing this, we can standardize the final element of the stimulus; exercise frequency. As it turns out, the amount of time required to recover sufficiently from a bout of high-intensity exercise is heavily dependent on the volume and specifics of the exercises performed.  Under the MSF Continuous Tension protocol, one can technically recover in as little as 24 hours, again depending on the particulars of the work performed.  However, in an effort to ensure full recovery and to maximize the timing of the anabolic window, 48 to 72 hours is likely a more optimal frequency.  As mentioned above, this coincides with the Muscle Protein Synthesis rate elevation period that is switched on after an intense workout.  It represents a period of time that the body synthesizes protein into muscle tissue at an elevated rate.
Activities of lower intensity (jogging, Pilates, typical multiple-set, not-to-failure weight training, etc.) produce a less significant stimulus that is more easily tolerated by the body.  In fact, such activities are more similar to the effort required from our daily activities and are heavily dependent on high frequency to maintain.  This is why there are different parameters around high-intensity strength training.
Therefore, using intelligent programming, we would consider 50% of the stimulus-response equation as stimulus, and recovery the other 50%.  0% 50%
Importantly, recovery is more than just the time in between workouts.  It begins with proper programming of the workout itself.  This is another feature of the MSF Continuous Tension protocol-we control volume by performing only one set and those sets are moderately heavy, so as to avoid excessive reps.  Additionally, we avoid extreme stretch positions, further reducing potential fatigue mechanisms.
Our bodies do not possess an infinite capacity for tolerating the exhaustive effects of physical stress.  On top of that, the older (and less capable) we get, the less recovery ability our body has.  In other words, the goal should be to do the most efficient exercise (high intensity, low-volume) so that resources can be used for growth rather than simply recovering to return to homeostasis.
We should also consider that as one gets truly stronger, they will be able to produce an even greater intensity through training and will thus require even more attention to detail in their programming to avoid overtraining.
It is crucial to understand that overtraining is not just an acute interruption in the exercise journey, but can have long term injurious consequences that can set one back years.  It will also impact the ability to continue training intensely in the future.  Importantly, we must understand that while our strength potential can increase two or three times our beginning levels, our recovery potential does not increase at the same rate and will not reach the same magnitude.
Now that we’ve discussed the effects of exercise on building strength and muscle and the importance of recovery management, let’s look at some of the additional benefits high intensity training provides.
The Body’s Response to High Intensity Training - Additional Benefits
Remember that the body perceives productive strength training as a threat to which the primary response is to overcompensate and grow stronger, but only with proper recovery management.
If this is the case, your body will build muscle and strength to create resiliency to better handle the stimulus the next time it is presented. But the adaptive response doesn’t stop here.
Once a stimulative mechanical tension has been experienced, the body will also respond with a host of other benefits that are at the source of why high intensity training is the most rewarding form of exercise.
The multitude of adaptations that transpire from high intensity resistance training encompass all of what we should expect from an effective exercise protocol and philosophy:
Structural
The process of producing a high level effort against a resistance results in an accumulation of new muscle tissue and an increase in strength.  As discussed above, this adaptive response is necessary to create a resiliency in the body to withstand future bouts of effort.  In addition to muscle, new bone is added for similar reasons.  Bone being living tissue responds to the mechanical loading and hormonal signaling produced by the workout.  Further anatomical adaptations include enhanced flexibility, better balance, and improved resistance to injury.
Metabolic
High intensity resistance training creates an environment where growth factors are released and the first stages of muscle growth are stimulated.  Further metabolic adaptations include improved glucose tolerance, metabolic rate, and HDL cholesterol improvements.
Cardiovascular System
Your cardio-respiratory system serves the mechanical functioning of the muscles.  The higher  the effort of muscular work, the higher the effort of cardiovascular and respiratory stimulus.  Further cardiovascular adaptations include improved blood pressure, resting heart rate, and cardiac output.
Hormonal
Quite possibly the most remarkable and impactful of the adaptations to strength training are the ones that influence a positive hormonal change.  High Intensity Resistance Training naturally stimulates growth hormone and testosterone, supporting muscle building, fat loss, vitality, and recovery.  While those benefits are more obvious, an exciting and possibly unexpected finding is that physical activity is extremely beneficial for improving symptoms of depression, anxiety, and distress.  More specifically, a new study shows that physical activity is 1.5 times more effective than counseling or the leading medications[¹].  And while all types of physical activity (e.g., walking, resistance training, pilates, and yoga) were beneficial, higher-intensity exercise had greater improvements for depression and anxiety.
Not to be outdone on the topic of hormones are myokines, and the relatively new understanding of their relationship to high intensity muscular work.  In a recent publication of the International Journal of Molecular Sciences, it was noted:
"In the last few years, the muscular system has gained attention due to the discovery of the muscle-secretome and its high potency for retaining or regaining health.  These cytokines, described as myokines released by the working muscle, are involved in anti-inflammatory, metabolic, and immunological processes.  These are able to influence human health in a positive way and are a target of research in metabolic diseases, cancer, neurological diseases, and other non-communicable diseases.  Therefore, different types of exercise training were investigated in the last few years to find associations between exercise, myokines, and their effects on human health. Particularly, resistance training turned out to be a powerful stimulus to enhance myokine release.”
In yet another enlightening article from the peer-reviewed academic journal, Endocrine Reviews, the following benefits of myokines were noted:
"Physical activity decreases the risk of a network of diseases, and exercise may be prescribed as medicine for lifestyle-related disorders such as type 2 diabetes, dementia, cardiovascular diseases, and cancer. During the past couple of decades, it has been apparent that skeletal muscle works as an endocrine organ, which can produce and secrete hundreds of myokines that exert their effects in either autocrine, paracrine, or endocrine manners. Recent advances show that skeletal muscle produces myokines in response to exercise, which allow for crosstalk between the muscle and other organs, including brain, adipose tissue, bone, liver, gut, pancreas, vascular bed, and skin, as well as communication within the muscle itself
As you can see, there are a whole host of expected and unexpected benefits to strength training, of which many of them are the famous Biomarkers of Aging.  The more of these biomarkers that worsen, the “older” you are medically.  Importantly, the common denominator to all of them is the amount of muscle mass we have, or don’t have.  As we get older, we steadily lose muscle (sarcopenia).  Without a strength-building intervention, all of these get worse as we age.
So as we can see, physical conditioning with high-intensity exercise can be outright transformative.  However, it is important to  understand that it also requires attention to rules and guidelines to make it safe and productive.  It takes a collaborative effort between subject and instructor to bring all the elements together so that all of the benefits can be experienced.
General Guidelines
Things We Do To Help Produce the Stimulus
We understand the process in the first place.
We are aware of the biological process of building strength and muscle and we know how to manipulate the variables to produce results.
We make sure the exercise is productive.
We push our clients to train beyond the level that they could do voluntarily, which is necessary as this type of effort goes against our instinctive mechanisms.
We train in accordance with muscle and joint function.
Every muscle has a prime function. When the muscle works in accordance with that prime function, it  can be maximally loaded safely.  We customize the settings so that the machine matches muscle and joint function, regardless of the proportions of the subject.
We provide the ideal environment.
An environment between 64 and 67 degrees with low humidity and circulating air allows for the highest level of effort.  If body heat accumulates, we experience uncomfortable sensations that will limit our potential output.
We provide privacy.
Productive high-intensity exercise is not a social endeavor. We ensure that when you exercise, you’ll be in a clinically-styled, medically based environment, sheltered from the general public.
We dress professionally.
We dress professionally because we view ourselves as strength training professionals.  Productive exercise is a serious undertaking for which we need to be the authority figure.  Informal studies have also shown that when instructors are professionally dressed, the subjects they supervise work harder and push themselves more deeply.
Things You Can Do To Help the Stimulus Process
You must be ready to concentrate.
Your body instinctively avoids stressful situations. Only through strict, intellectual override will you be able to train effectively.  You must be determined, attentive, and focused.
You must learn to continually train harder.
This takes time, practice, and confidence. Most subjects mistake the sensations of discomfort for failure.  As the muscles fatigue, the movement will begin to slow down even more.  This sensation is somewhat unnatural and even threatening as we discussed above.  It is at this point that most subjects quit or hold the position as the instructor counts them down.  Instead, we challenge our clients to really dig deep.  It may take upwards of 10 seconds or more to complete the final positive.  When failure is truly reached, a subject should not be calmly holding the position during the countdown.  Instead, they need to learn how to continue producing the highest level effort possible as if the movement has not ceased.  Eventually, the well intended subject will reach a point where the machine will begin to work its way back against their positive effort.  This is not easy or desirable to the body and takes months if not years of practice to master.  That’s where we come in.  MSF instructors understand how to carry out this process safely and efficiently and will help to learn this invaluable skill.  But the subject needs to be a willing participant.
You must breathe continuously and freely.
As the work becomes harder, breathe freely without a scheme.  This type of ventilation blows off CO2 (carbon dioxide) and keeps your blood pH normal longer.  It also allows your muscles to function for a longer duration and therefore experience higher levels of stimulative tension. Avoid breath-holding/Valsalva. Performing Valsalva increases blood pressure along with several other negative consequences.  This will be challenging to override however as this is an instinctive mechanism that actually allows us to produce more force in the moment.  But it does this to the detriment of the real objective of the exercise.
You must attempt to move smoothly with control.
When subjects are in the more difficult positions of an exercise or close to the end of a set, there’ll be an urge to jab and back off, jab and back off.  It’s actually very instinctive to behave in this manner and therefore takes practice to overcome.  During  the “back-off” period and before each subsequent jab, there is an unloading effect.  This allows the working muscles to regain some of their strength, thus obviating the tension we seek from the training.  It also adds an element of risk that is non-productive.
You must understand the objective and purpose.
The assumed objective of exercise is to lift a heavier weight for more reps than last  time.  Or to reach some predetermined quantitative measure.  The real objective is to subject as many muscle fibers (activate) to as much tension (stimulus) as possible.  This requires as high a level of effort as possible with as high a level of quality as possible.  Subjects should not necessarily be concerned with quantitative outcomes as that approach will most likely lead to the movement discrepancies we look to avoid.
Things No One Can Do To Help
Genetics play a primary role in the outcomes.
The muscular response to resistance training is genetically mediated and cannot be changed.  A multitude of genetic factors help determine the degree of response with the most visible of these factors being the size and formation of the bones and the length of the muscles and tendons.  However, among the myriad of complex genetic influences there is at least one recent discovery  that trumps almost everything else we know about the genetic underpinnings of muscular response.  Scientists have discovered a gene called myostatin that acts as a “muscular thermostat”, setting an upper limit to the amount of muscle that an organism can grow. When a  muscle approaches the limits of its size, myostatin actually prevents further increases.
So What Does This Mean For You?
We all have a myostatin gene with varying degrees of low, medium or high levels expression.  The higher the level of expression, the less muscle mass that can be built.  As one becomes stronger, they will produce a degree of muscle growth that allows for an optimal mechanical and metabolic efficiency.  While it may not be the amount of muscle desired, it will be the optimal amount for each individual.
But we can all be certain of this: If we use proper exercise to stimulate maximal muscle gains, we will add invaluable tissue that is now being referred to as the “longevity organ”.  And if we choose not to incorporate consistent strength training into our lives, we stand to lose out on the benefits discussed throughout this article.
Conclusion
So regardless of the amount of muscle we’re capable of building, or the aesthetic outcome from our training, there’s no arguing that it very well could be the most beneficial and important endeavor we can adopt for our health and longevity.  We owe it to ourselves to truly master our training and to be actively involved in our progress.  To have qualitative discussions with our instructors about our training and fully optimize our time and investment.  Welcome to a new level of excellence in exercise.  Welcome to MaxStrength Fitness.