Muscular Sufficiency/Insufficiency
There is a limit to how far a muscle can stretch or shorten.  As a result, certain muscles that act on more than one joint (polyarticular muscles) can only effectively produce or allow maximal movement to occur around one of those joints at a time.  The ability of a polyarticular muscle to produce or allow movement around a particular joint is called sufficiency.
There are two types of muscular sufficiency; active and passive.
·       Active sufficiency exists when the body is positioned so all polyarticular muscles required to produce a particular joint movement are at an optimal length to do so.  When a polyarticular muscle is already significantly shortened across another joint, it is unable to effectively shorten further to produce the desired joint movement.  This is called active insufficiency.  An example of this is when the hip is flexed (shortened, therefore “active”) the quadriceps cannot fully shorten enough to completely straighten the knee.
·       Passive sufficiency exists when the body is positioned so all polyarticular muscles antagonistic to a particular joint movement are at an optimal length to allow that movement to occur.  When a polyarticular muscle is already significantly stretched across another joint, it is unable to stretch further to allow the desired joint movement to occur.  This is called passive insufficiency.  An example of this is when the knee is extended (hamstrings lengthened, therefore “passive”) the hip cannot be flexed as far.
So for practical purposes, consider the following examples:
·       When performing the leg curl the ankle must be dorsiflexed as the knee approaches full flexion to allow active sufficiency of the gastrocnemius, which crosses both the ankle and knee joints and assists in knee flexion.
·       When performing the leg extension, the ankles must stay relaxed to allow passive sufficiency of the gastrocnemius so that the knee may fully extend.
Instructors must know how to satisfy requirements for active and passive muscular sufficiency during exercise when applicable.