The idea that we should be “developing a narrative” is a critical one for those of us that are selling a product or service, obviously.  But it’s even more important when that product or service is so drastically different from what has traditionally been considered common knowledge with such firmly held “beliefs” about a topic.  And in this case, the topic of strength training and muscle building has been exactly that…beliefs taken as fact and being passed around by gym goers, athletic coaches, the medical community, and even the general public.  I’ve seen it called “bro science” and I couldn’t think of a more fitting name.  You can almost always expect a discussion beyond just an elevator pitch as our emerging understanding and the MSF methodology is counter to the popular belief.  Below we will discuss the high level concepts of the physiology behind strength training to better prepare you for these discussions as well as the strategies that you can implement in your own training as you begin to build your MSF business.
Now, before we go any further, just know that I too believed in this faulty “bro science” as most of us did and many still do.  As a result, I relied on high volume training for the better part of 20 years before I found MSF and began to leverage the scientific literature available.  Additionally, in the interest of full disclosure, I think it’s important to acknowledge that I personally do not dive into and dissect these studies.  Instead, I rely on interpretations and meta analyses from trusted physiologists.  I look for things that make sense and put them together with other things that make sense to formulate my position.  I’m also a huge fan of simplification.  While there is a ton of detail to consider as an Exercise Practitioner, and I constantly refer to our need to be detail oriented, it should all be supported by a simple framework.  And in this case that simple framework is the physiological mechanisms that create responses or stimuli in the body.  These are some of the things that will be discussed throughout this paper.
The Common Beliefs
So in beginning to formulate our narrative I think a good place to start is to dispel some of the more commonly held beliefs about strength training.  For one, those with a surface level orientation to strength training will tell you that muscle is built by first being torn down and then rebuilt stronger.  This is often the only requirement proclaimed for building muscle.  In stating this most popular attribute, they are missing the two other mechanisms that are commonly stated as fact by the more well studied coaches, trainers, or physiologists.  Those two other avenues to muscle building would be, metabolic stress and mechanical tension.  So here we have it, the three ways to build muscle that has been passed around for decades:
Muscle damage
Metabolic stress
Mechanical tension
And the result of having these three mechanisms available for muscle building is that most of the workouts and strategies have been designed to encapsulate all three.  Why not, right?  It would seem to make sense that the more poles we have in the water so to speak, the better the chance we have at achieving results.  The more muscle we should build and the faster we should build that muscle.
Because of the believed mechanisms discussed above, typical workout strategies would include excessive volume in an effort to capture all of the potential benefits.  They would have multiple sets of the same exercises and multiple exercises per muscle group including more stretched positions to create the coveted soreness or damage.  They would also include high reps for the metabolic stress “finisher” or “burn” that many believe to be stimulative.  And for the last one, mechanical tension, I would venture to guess many would want to include some heavier sets.  So when you add all that up, you have a lot of volume.  And I realize that “a lot” is a relative term here.  A lot of trainees would probably think 10 or more sets per muscle group in a workout is pretty standard.
What We Know to be True
Now that we know the beliefs and how that has shaped the more commonly prescribed workout protocols, let’s take a look at what we now know to be true and how that changes things.  First and foremost, there is only one driver of hypertrophy…mechanical tension.  The other mechanisms were disproved by testing each one in the absence of mechanical tension and observing the results.  In either case, damaging a muscle or injecting it with metabolites, there was no myofibrillar hypertrophy (addition or growth of muscle fibers).  In the case of muscle damage, the hormonal response is similar to that from a workout but the result is to simply clear the resulting inflammation from the damage and repair the muscle fiber to its original state.  And when a muscle is injected with lactic acid for example, there is no muscular growth.  These are both side effects of training but not stimuli for growth.  Only mechanical tension stimulates muscular growth.
So the next question we should answer is, what is mechanical tension (MT) and how does it lead to hypertrophy?  MT is the physical pulling force experienced by individual muscle fibers.  Muscle fibers overlap when they contract and this is accomplished by the actin and myosin filaments sliding over top of each other, or overlapping.  In other words, muscles “pull” on bones to move them when they contract and this pulling force is what creates MT.  Technically MT will be present in any muscular contraction performed by the body.  But if we are lifting a cup of coffee and therefore producing MT, is that really going to make us stronger or build muscle?
The answer to that question is obviously no.  So then how does MT actually lead to hypertrophy?  The key to this most important question lies in something known as the force velocity relationship of skeletal muscle.  Simply stated, as the velocity of movement decreases the force that can be produced increases.  There is an inverse relationship.  So lifting a relatively heavy weight slowly (low velocity) requires a more maximal force.  Importantly, this low velocity movement has to be involuntarily slow.  Here are a couple of ways to conceptualize this:
The speed of movement of an implement one is lifting begins to slow down despite the effort to maintain the pace or accelerate.  This could happen with any object and in any setting such as freeweights, selectorized equipment, strongman training implements, or a heavy bag of mulch in the back yard.  If we cannot lift it any faster, we will have a higher level of MT present.
It could more simply be stated as training to or near muscular failure, which for our purposes happens at concentric failure.  The reps closest to the end of a set tend to slow down until the subject can no longer lift the weight.  And while many believe that failure occurs when the involved muscles are fully fatigued, that is not the case.  This is another fallacy that was never linked to a mechanism.  Instead, we reach our maximum tolerable perception of effort via the corollary discharge sent to the brain.  It is basically a replicate copy of the central motor command signal sent from the brain to produce the effort.  That’s another topic for the future.
The slower movement results from a slower contraction velocity in the muscle.  The myosin heads of the muscle fiber pull on the actin filaments and slide past each other as they shorten or contract. Because of this slow velocity, the muscle fiber components stay attached longer rather than pulling and releasing almost instantly as occurs in faster movements.  By hanging on longer, there are more connections made, which creates a greater pulling force from the muscle.  And this higher level of pulling force is what creates the potential for stimulative levels of MT in the active muscle fibers.  That last part is critical and it is a foundational concept to understanding the physiology in strength training.  It is that a muscle fiber cannot be stimulated until it is first activated by the central motor command of the brain.  This is known as motor unit recruitment (MUR) and the magnitude of our MUR is governed by our effort.  The greater the effort the greater the MUR.  And one of the more interesting ideas in resistance training is that our highest possible levels of MUR can be increased with progressively higher levels of effort over time.  So we can increase our upper limit.  In fact this must happen I we are to sustain progress.  Just know that in an indirect way, the whole purpose of training is to become better at training; to become more tolerant of training; and to get a better effect from training.
In considering all of the above, we can now have a better understanding of why excessive volume, soreness, muscle damage, high reps, etc. are not only unnecessary but detrimental to the results we seek.  The fatigue caused from all of those typical workout attributes compete for resources with the hypertrophy stimulus.  There will be a lot more to discuss on this topic too if you are interested.  The take home message here is that once we create the stimulus, more reps/sets/tension will not necessarily lead to a larger stimulus.  Once a muscle is stimulated, it would be best to move onto training another muscle region (many muscle groups have multiple regions).
How Much is Enough?
At this point you may be wondering how much stimulus we need?  Is it one rep?  Would it need to be multiple sets?  Well, the ultimate test will be whether or not we are progressing in our lifts with the same or better execution (and execution is a form of progression itself).  Now, when we train consistently for long enough, meaning several years at least, we can expect progress to begin to slow down drastically.  It’s important to keep in mind that progress is never linear.  There are ups and downs and stale periods where no progress is made.  A more experienced trainee can truly be successful by not getting weaker.  And while this may seem like a weak mentality if you think about the following, it brings perspective to the reality of our species.  Imagine being as strong at 85 years old as you were at 50.  Think about the reality of that and how much progress that would actually be.  In this way can think of muscle and strength as a bank account and we want to drive that balance up as high as we can as we age.
For the most part, one “hard” set will take care of the stimulus for that muscle region (i.e. the muscle fibers activated for that movement pattern).  Now if we’ve been training for any amount of time, we are likely going to have to take that set to failure; or more accurately, reach our maximum tolerable perception of effort.  And even more importantly, we need to voluntarily push harder as the movement arm (or implement) slows down.  We need to “prove to ourselves” in a way that we really are pushing/pulling as hard as we can and that the movement is in fact slowing down on us.  Once we get really expert at doing this, one set will absolutely work.  If someone isn’t quite getting there or prefers to train short of failure [known as reps in reserve(rir)], then two sets can and probably should be performed.  But with additional sets comes additional fatigue.  Every contraction is fatiguing, even at the lowest levels.
What is the Best Overall Strategy for Resistance Training?
The best strategy then appears to be heavier weight for lower reps taken at least close to failure (0 to 1 rir) for one set.  And this approach would best be used as part of a full body workout where we are training as many muscle regions that we can, still perform at a high level throughout the workout, and still recover.  This also proves why longer rest periods are likely better for strength and hypertrophy.  We want to be able to perform every exercise in our program to the highest level we are capable in that moment.  And remember we should see improved progress over the long term not necessarily session to session.
Strength training should not be seen as a cardio workout.  Although for the deconditioned, it certainly will.  They will likely not be able to recover (i.e. catch their breath) between sets if they are training to a stimulative level.  This side effect is a bonus as they will become more cardiovascularly fit over time with our workouts.
How Many Sets (Exercises)?
These full body workouts can be comprised of 6 to 12 exercises (Note: some  may not be able to tolerate more than 5 or 6.  Quality over quantity will always be the priority).  Some will be able to handle more, and if it is targeting a muscle region not covered by one of the other exercises or you want to devote a little more stimulus to an area that can be a strategy.  If this is the case, however,  you should probably lower the intensity on a handful of other exercises to account for it.  Remember, we do not have endless growth potential and you cannot force more stimulus into the system.  While we do not know how much that might be, our body will often let us know when we are overtraining, so be aware of this possibility and adjust accordingly.
What’s the Optimal Frequency?
The last topic we will discuss here is the idea of the period of favorable hormonal state after a training session that appears to last for approximately 48 hours.  This is known as the period of elevated Muscle Protein Synthesis or MPS period.  We want to maximize our time spent in an elevated state of MPS because that is when we add contractile proteins to existing muscle fibers (sarcomerogenesis) or build new muscle fiber from those proteins (myofibrillar addition).  If we do the math then, in order to optimize, we would want to train every other day.  And since hypertrophy is muscle fiber specific, we would want to perform similar (or repeat the same) movement patterns in every workout.  At twice a week we will build muscle tissue over time and as low as once per week can build strength for the rest of one’s life.  There are certain strategies that we can use here and ultimately end up in the same place in terms of genetic potential for muscle and strength but I made a case for what is optimal, meaning the fastest results without pharmaceuticals.