Chest Press - MSF Comprehensive Overview
Target Muscles:
Pectoralis Major (Chest/Pecs) - Shoulder horizontal Adduction
Triceps - Elbow Extension (straightening of arm)
Anterior Deltoid (Shoulder) - Shoulder horizontal Adduction
Synergists:
Erector Spinae (Spinal Erectors) - Spinal Extension/Anterior Pelvic Tilt (chest up posture)
Lower Trapezius (Upper Back) - Scapular stabilizer
Rotator Cuff - Shoulder stabilizers
Considerations for setup:
Because the seat is higher off the ground than other machines, all clients will require a stool to support the legs.  Some may need a stool for entry so be attentive to this need and proactively guide them in safely.
Determine height of the seat based on the upper arm angled off the body approximately 30 to 45 degrees.  The elbow will be bent at approximately 90 degrees or more depending on the depth of the lower turnaround (i.e. the gap).  The handles should approximate the hands in this position.
If the seat is too high, the elbow will be higher than the hands when placed on the handles.  If the seat is too low, the elbows will be significantly lower than the hands on the handles.  The elbows should be just slightly lower than the hands so that the forearm will be aligned with the movement path (tracking slightly upward as the handles are pushed away).
Subject will place the heel of the palm on the bend of the handle.  This will create a semi-pronated grip with the thumb side of the hands slightly rotated upward (begin to supinate from a palms down position).
Next find the position of the seat back which will be based off the point at which the handles converge at the upper turnaround.  Ensure the weight stack is clear and assist the handles out to the end stop.  Ideally the subject will be able to just fully straighten at the elbow without protracting or rounding forward.  Chest stays up throughout the movement and the ribcage is held rigidly still in this position.  NOTE: Because the movement arms converge, there is a component of adduction that will ensure that the chest is still contracted even though the arms are straight.
With the seat height and back set and with the subject’s hands on the handles, the trainer will assist the unloaded handles back to a conservative/reasonable stretch to determine the lower turnaround.  For someone with a compromised shoulder joint, a more conservative lower turnaround should be used.  Look for the position of the elbow to be forward of the midline of the torso when viewed from the side.  For those with otherwise healthy shoulders, the elbow can be just behind the midline of the torso resulting in a slightly deeper stretch.  The gap establishes the lower turnaround and will be recorded on the chart.
The instructor must take into consideration that when the movement is loaded, the resulting compression of the padding and flexing of the movement arms will create more space than was apparent without loading.
Posture/Get Set:
Chest up, hips back, chin slightly tucked (neutral) with shoulders held in retraction.  Upper arms should be abducted (pointed out to the sides) somewhere between 30 and 45 degrees.  This needs to be maintained for the duration of the set and should essentially be considered part of the exercise as should all postures on all machines.
The feet should be in contact with a stool so that the knees are higher than the hips.  If the feet are left dangling, there will be an inability to properly maintain posture and there will be a loss of output and stability.  Not to mention that many subjects will find this uncomfortable and distracting.  The more someone is given an opportunity to move, shift, or wiggle, the less effective the exercise will be and there is an additional element of risk.
Hands are placed at the bend of the handles.  In some cases a subject may find the hand placement uncomfortable and a slight adjustment is permitted.  Consider hand pads too in an effort to blunt the pressure.
The movement will begin at the lower turnaround.
Execution, Instruction, and Turnarounds:
LOAD UP:  From the starting position (lower turn), keeping chest up with shoulders in retraction and neutral head position, upper arms abducted, establish breathing then the instructor has given the cue to begin the load up, there should be a quiet moment where the instructor is intently observing the actions.  If done properly, a simple “perfect” or “yes, just like that” is an opportunity for positive feedback.
CONCENTRIC:  Movement arms will begin converging until they ultimately touch or come close with elbows straightened (upper turn).  Instructor should click at the moment that happens (or wherever strength and effort permit movement near the end of a set).
ECCENTRIC:  After the load up and first concentric, and immediately after the click, the instructor may cue “ease out…do not speed up.”  There is no pause or squeeze on a compound pushing movement.
LOWER TURN:  While the client is in the first eccentric phase of the set, the instructor must inform the client of what will constitute the lower turnaround and what the client is expected to do there.  In this case the client will “touch and go” or “be continuous at the bottom” or “barely touch, barely start” or “seamlessly change direction as the weights touch” or “soft touch, do not pause.”  All of those cues require the client to control their pace and increase their focus as they sense for the exact moment the weights touch.  Again, this creates a level of safety we require with our Continuous Tension protocol.  Remember, there is always a cue to give on the first eccentric of an exercise.
One continuous pace with no perceivable pause at any point until concentric movement stalls.
Maintain posture, head position, pace, and arm path, and throughout.  Elbows should track through the same path concentrically and eccentrically, to ensure consistent loading of target musculature.
And while we are encouraging the subject to maintain their pace, they should expect to have to increase their effort over the course of a set.  Effort does not remain constant.  In order to maintain a given pace with increasing fatigue, effort needs to voluntarily increase as a counter to the fatigue.  This is how stimulative mechanical tension is created.
NOTES
It may be necessary or beneficial to describe “gradual” to the subject (e.g. 20 pounds of pressure, 40 pounds, 60 pounds, eventually reaching enough force to begin moving).  Or have client imagine that there was 100 pounds on weight stack and they are to gradually find 101 pounds of pressure, or just enough to crack the weight stack.  Also remind them that this gradual load up may take 3 to 5 seconds before movement actually occurs.
There is no pause on a chest press.  It is one continuous effort.  Care should still be given to exaggerate control on the changes of direction (“drag out the turn” or “almost pause but don’t”).  Also make sure the subject reaches the end stop (upper turn) fully prior to the click that indicates the change of direction.  New instructors tend to click too soon causing confusion on exactly where the change of direction occurs.
Height of the client and arm length will be a primary driver of seat height and back pad position.  Taller subjects will usually have a lower seat and longer arms will have a back pad that is set further back.  But care should still be given to align the forearm with the path of the movement arm (elbow slightly lower than hand at lower turn and throughout movement path).  The movement arms travel out and up so importantly, the hand and elbow need to follow that same path.  We are “stacking the joints” to ensure better leverage and a more natural feeling movement.
Importantly, while learning the Continuous Tension protocol, the subject will most likely be using a relatively light weight and as a result will probably be capable of performing a higher number of reps, spending more time on the machine.  While this may seem conducive to learning, it can also be counterproductive from a discomfort standpoint.  Yes a big part of the learning curve is to be able to produce an effort while managing discomfort, but there can be diminishing returns in that the movement becomes intolerable before it is stimulative.  Ideally we should be striving for perfect form with “faster” reps (i.e. 6 second positive, 6 second negative) and a “heavier” weight that leads to failure in 10 or fewer reps.  While this may not be achievable or advisable in the initial sessions, as long as the subject is demonstrating a clear understanding of the control required, we may progress the intensity more quickly.