Leg Curl - MSF Comprehensive Overview
Target Muscles:
Hamstrings - Knee Flexion
Gastrocnemius (Calf) - Knee Flexion
Synergists:
Sartorius (upper leg in front of thigh) - assists in Knee Flexion
Gracilis (inner thigh) - assists in Knee Flexion
Wrist Flexors (Forearms) - gripping/holding - anchoring into seat with arms
Considerations for setup:
LC will most likely have a gap of 2 or 3 as an introduction to this exercise (this will be determined by the Studio Leader and MSF Corp).  A gap of 3 or more may be advised for those with knee injuries/issues.
Move the seat back to the rearmost position leaving the largest possible area on the seat.
Have the subject sit with their femurs cantilevered off the front of the seat and the lower leg hanging.  They may need to raise at least one of their knees to approximate the roller pad (also referred to as the shin or tibia pad).  The knee should align with the axis of rotation of the machine, which puts the knee cap at the edge of the roller pad but NOT under the pad.  No part of the patella can be under the roller pad as this is extremely uncomfortable and puts the knee in a position of hyperextension.  Instead the patellas should “crowd” the roller pad with the top of the tibia under the pad.
Have the subject remain seated but lean forward slightly (they may need to hold on to the frame for balance, it is safe to do at this point because we will not yet be moving the weight stack).  Then carefully bring the back pad forward to just make contact with the subject’s lower back (note: the seat back should not push them further forward as the knees will then go forward of the axis of rotation).  Have the subject sit all the way back in the seat and verify that the knees are still in alignment with the axis of rotation.
Once the seat setting is determined, have the subject exit and stand so that the weight can be selected and they may be properly loaded into the machine.
Due to the unfamiliarity a new client will have with the pressure of the force couple from the movement arm acting on the knee joint in the starting position of the LC, there will most likely be a standard gap of at least 1 and maybe 2.  This will depend on the size of the client’s lower body and the mobility they possess at the knee joint.  Larger legs and hip girdles will require more room and a larger gap at the starting point to avoid potential hyperextension at the knee.  This standardized gap may vary slightly between machines and should be discussed with the MSF Corporate team during installation.
Set the appropriate weight, again with a gap of 1 or 2 or as otherwise determined for that particular client on that particular LC machine.  Then, using the assist bar attached to the movement arm, pull the movement arm down to an approximate midpoint.  Facing the client in the trainer will want to shift over to the left and use their right knee on the calf pad to assist in pulling the movement arm down.  This will also leave room for the client to sit on the corner of the seat and sweep their legs in from the side and between the roller pads.  Carefully lower the weight to set the movement arm into the starting position (client’s legs will now be extended out in front of them).  Assess the location of the knee joint relative to the axis of rotation and the proximity of the patella to the roller pad.
ALTERNATIVE LOADING METHOD: In the event that the weight being used is too heavy to be moved with the assist bar and knee, just set the desired weight only on the accessory stack and move the tibia pad out of the way.  With this technique, the trainer will only be lifting the 20 pounds on the main stack and whatever weight is needed for the working set on the accessory stack.  The trainer will then lower the movement arm so that the weight stack reveals the desired gap.  Note that because of the lack of weight acting on the movement arm the trainer may have to force the mechanism back against the passive tension of the subject’s legs.  Then tactfully reach across the client’s body to select the proper main stack weight and gap.
Once seated and in place in the force couple of the movement arm, the instructor will need to consider adjusting the calf pad.  This is the other roller pad of the two that belong to the movement arm.  Ideally, the calf pad will make contact with the lowest part of the back of the leg, in a position that is just above the achilles tendon (i.e. above the heel).  Keep in mind because this setting is on a circular path and not simply linear, it may create a tighter or looser fit.  In most cases, a tighter fit that is still comfortable will be ideal.  As such, the trainer may have to consider altering the gap in light of changing the calf pad setting.
Posture/Get Set:
Chest up - lay back against the angle of the seat with the head upright in a neutral position looking forward.  Secure seat belt tightly across hip crease.  Hands on handles pulling up for leverage.  Face and jaw relaxed, breathing freely.  Feet and ankles relaxed (upon load up and during first two repetitions).
Execution, Instruction, and Turnarounds:
From the starting position (lower turn), keeping neutral head position, feet and ankles relaxed, pulling up on the handles, establish breathing and gradually activate the force couple by bending the knees and applying pressure into the roller pads.
Once the instructor has given the cue to begin the load up, there should be a quiet moment where the instructor is intently observing the actions.  If done properly, a simple “perfect” or “yes, just like that” is an opportunity for positive feedback.
Subject will move through this first concentric phase until the knees are maximally bent, with the “click” after the brief pause or squeeze (or wherever strength, effort, and individual range of motion permit movement).
After the load up and first concentric, and immediately after the click, the instructor may cue “ease out and do not speed up.”
The instructor then needs to establish the expectation for the first lower turnaround of the set, which on the leg curl will be to “touch and go” or “be continuous” or “barely touch, barely start”.  Remember, there is always a cue to give on the first eccentric of an exercise.
Touch and go at the lower turn as if “seamlessly passing through the change of direction.”
Keep hips down by anchoring with the hands.
After the lower turnaround at the beginning of the third rep, the client will dorsiflex their ankles.  This should take place AFTER the change of direction and should be seamlessly activated during the concentric.  Encourage the client to “keep the ankles relaxed during the turn…now pull the feet up to the knees [give visual demonstration if necessary].”
As the client approaches the upper turn (contracted position) we might give the cue to “keep the ankles flexed, keep the movement arm still, keep breathing, [click], relax the ankles, THEN ease out.”  Note that the ankles are relaxed while still in the contracted position.  No movement occurs while client relaxes their ankles.  Then they ease out of the contracted position.  These are two separate actions that take place sequentially.  Relax the ankles first, THEN begin to lower the weight.
One continuous pace with only a “brief but definite” pause of about one second in the contracted position of the first two reps and a squeeze of two to three seconds from the third rep on.  Keep in mind, we cannot simply rely on the cue of ‘squeeze’ in this situation.  That can mean various things to different people.  We need to teach them HOW to squeeze.
Verbiage for the pause/squeeze in the contracted position might be “pulling up on the handles, drive your knees into the roller pad while pulling your heels toward your rear end, keep breathing, keep still, [click], relax your ankles, THEN ease out, don’t speed up” or “keeping your head still, bend your knees as tightly as you can, there, lock it in place, [click], ease out.”  So during the desired duration of the squeeze in the contracted position, we are providing useful direction.
Maintain posture, head position, pace, and contact on roller pads.  The only movement on this exercise is at the knee joint and maybe the arms resulting from an increased need for leverage from the handles.  Everything else is held still.
Importantly, the number of reps recorded will only be those that the instructor deems were full reps.  So if the client does not reach full flexion of the knee (for them), that is not a full rep and will not be recorded in the rep count on the chart.  But due to the nature of certain exercises, and leg curl being one of them, it may make sense to continue the set despite the client no longer achieving full range of motion.  There will still be stimulative tension experienced on the partial reps as long as they are within the client’s exacting control.
The decision to continue a set after reaching concentric failure is highly individual and should be discussed with a studio Leader or with MSF Corporate.  For a brand new client, just completing a handful of full range of motion reps may be enough to introduce the exercise.  So in other words, we may not even take them to concentric failure if they are new to strength training or if they are showing signs of adverse discomfort or losing proper form.  This is a progressive journey.
And while we are encouraging the subject to maintain their pace, they should expect to have to increase their effort over the course of a set.  Effort does not remain constant.  In order to maintain a given pace with increasing fatigue, effort needs to voluntarily increase as a counter to the fatigue.  This is how stimulative mechanical tension is created.
NOTES
It may be necessary or beneficial to describe “gradual” to the subject (e.g. 20 pounds of pressure, 40 pounds, 60 pounds, eventually reaching enough force to begin moving).  Or have client imagine that there was 100 pounds on weight stack and they are to gradually find 101 pounds of pressure, or just enough to crack the weight stack.  Also remind them that this gradual load up may take 3 to 5 seconds before movement actually occurs.  We might give imagery of just barely beginning to dent the roller pads by bending the knees and increasing pressure from there.
We give the instruction to relax the feet and ankles on the first two reps and begin to flex the ankles during the concentric from the third rep on.  The idea behind this is to just use the hamstrings on the first two reps while the subject is at full strength.  Then after the first two reps, by flexing the ankles (dorsiflexion), we are gaining leverage for the calf (gastrocnemius) to contribute.  It will increase strength on the concentric and allow for a tighter contraction (squeeze) at the upper turnaround.  The ankles are then relaxed to allow only the hamstring to lower the weight as all muscles are stronger on the eccentric.  Once practiced enough times, this “toggling” between flexing and relaxing the ankles feels natural and is a synergistic action in this movement pattern.  While it may seem like an overthought detail, it is an effective way to establish control of the load, heighten awareness of the targeted muscles, and can increase motor unit recruitment.
As discussed above, it is imperative that the MSF Exercise Practitioner become keenly aware of how much intensity to provide each individual client on every exercise in each workout.  As a general rule, the newer, more deconditioned a client is, the less intensity is required to create a stimulus (i.e. positive effect).  So it will be in their best interest to introduce the concept of resistance training more conservatively.  Start lighter and teach them how to control the movement.  They’ll be better able to receive instruction when they’re not overwhelmed by the struggle.  We still absolutely need to teach them intensity and progress their effort and quality but it will be a slower, longer process for these types.  Again, show the client that we care more about their workout than they do!
The leg curl has a reputation for creating cramps or “fear of cramps” from its subjects.  There will often be feedback during a set along the lines of “it feels like my legs are cramping” or “it feels like my muscles are tearing.”  While we should certainly entertain the discussion with genuine concern, it is more likely that these are just sensations resulting from the unfamiliar nature of knee flexion against a resistance.  Most people will bend the knee in the course of everyday life but few will load the knee flexion pattern directly.  To add to this, it seems that the modern day lifestyle has led to a tighter, possibly shorter hamstring.  After enough sessions and as strength increases, this sensation will most likely go away completely.
We may find that the client is physically incapable of fully bending one or both knees.  If this is the case, then we need to redefine what is a full range of motion for that client (this should be noted on the chart with “limited ROM” or “limit flexion” for purposes of consistency session to session and trainer to trainer).
As an added tool in the toolbox here, we may decide for those subjects that lack full knee flexion, to use a hard end stop at THEIR contracted position (upper turn).  This is accomplished by using the extra selector pin and placing it in the main stack pin above the weight stack so that it makes contact with the top of the frame at the subject’s approximate upper turnaround (document the # of empty holes between the top of the weight stack and the location of the selector pin).  This will help create consistency in the range of motion, provide a target for encouraging the subject, and create a termination point for effort to be applied against in the squeeze position.  Over time, we may be able to increase the range of motion (by lowering the pin) as the subject gets stronger.
It is important to note here that given the situation in the points above, the ability to fully bend the knee is not a requirement to successfully perform this exercise.  It’s not as though the fully contracted position is the only beneficial part of the movement pattern and it may be argued that there is no additive benefit from a hypertrophy standpoint from that full contraction.  It is useful however, not only in establishing a consistency in execution and range of motion, but in allowing the client to “feel” the working muscles.  To assist in creating that mental connection, which can contribute to an increase in motor unit recruitment (MUR).  Additionally, it is technically more difficult to lift the weight further and fully contract, which allows for a lighter more conservative weight to be used while still providing all of the challenge we seek.
Importantly, while learning the Continuous Tension protocol, the subject will most likely be using a relatively light weight and as a result will probably be capable of performing a higher number of reps, spending more time on the machine.  While this may seem conducive to learning, it can also be counterproductive from a discomfort standpoint.  Yes a big part of the learning curve is to be able to produce an effort while managing discomfort, but there can be diminishing returns in that the movement becomes intolerable before it is stimulative.  Ideally we should be striving for perfect form with “faster” reps (i.e. 6 second positive, 6 second negative) and a “heavier” weight that leads to failure in 10 or fewer reps.  While this may not be achievable or advisable in the initial sessions, as long as the subject is demonstrating a clear understanding of the control required, we may progress the intensity more quickly.