Leg Press - MSF Comprehensive Overview
Target Muscles:
Quadriceps (Thighs) - Knee Extension
Gluteus Maximus (Rear end/buttocks) - Hip Extension
Synergists:
Hamstrings
Gastrocnemius (Calves)
Soleus (Calves)
Adductor Magnus (Inner Thigh)
Considerations for setup:
Determine position of seat back.  Default of position 2 (P2) will be optimal for most.  Larger subjects may benefit from a position 3 as it will allow for less congestion around the midsection.  Also in situations where subjects may not tolerate a certain amount of hip flexion, P3 may serve them well.  Just keep in mind that the trade off for a more reclined position can be more pressure from the shoulder pads as well as a greater potential for the hips to rise out of the seat.  Both of which are undesirable and should be monitored by the instructor.
Set shoulder pads so they are touching top of shoulders when subject is laying back in seat.  At this point in the setup, it is recommended to have the full accessory stack pinned at 18 pounds to facilitate the next steps.  The main stack should be clear with the instructor holding the selector pin, while 18 pounds is set on the accessory.
The instructor will push the footplate out to a point that is just within reach of the client’s leg length.  Affix feet to the footplate so that we achieve an approximate hip width position.  This will ensure that the ankles, knees, and hips are aligned or “stacked.”  Feet should be parallel.  Exceptions to this suggested setup would be subjects with larger frames or those that may lack internal rotation of the femur at the hip.  In either case it may be optimal to take a wider stance with the toes angled out slightly.  This will help to minimize abdominal compression at the lower turnaround and will account for the lack of rotation at the hip.  Importantly, the knees should then track out over the feet at that same approximate angle.
The instructor can carefully release the control of the footplate to the client who will have their feet in place.  There will be a total of 38 pounds (20 from the main and 18 from the accessory) pushing back against the client, which will make it easier for the client to keep their feet in place.  At this point the instructor will show the client how to place
Adjust seat to allow footplate to abut end stop just before knees fully straighten.  It is advisable to push the seat in a couple of settings closer than what appears necessary to account for the spacing that is created under load (note: this only applies to the first time on the machine during the setup).
Bring footplate back to establish starting point (lower turnaround) taking note of the gap.  Consider the knee bend and hip flexion for each individual client.  Also note that the instructor will have to assist the unloaded footplate back as the client will most likely not be able to flex their hips enough to get the footplate into the starting position we desire (note: this only applies to the first time on the machine during the setup).
When the footplate is at the desired position for the lower turnaround (and starting position), the instructor may ask the client to pin the weight stack at the suggested weight so as not to reach across the client’s body.  In the event that the trainer has long enough arms and/or the weight is light enough that the higher plates can be reached more easily, the trainer can just pin the weight themselves.  This would be the ideal scenario and note will only happen on the initial setup of the machine.
The instructor must take into consideration that when the movement is loaded, the resulting compression of the padding and flexing of the movement arms will create more space than was apparent without loading.
Posture/Get Set:
Chest up - lay back in the seat with head forward or supported by a pillow.  Hands on either set of handles.  Face and jaw relaxed, breathing freely.
Execution, Instruction, and Turnarounds:
LOAD UP:  From the starting position (lower turn), keeping neutral head position (cue to get into position with something along the lines of “chin down”), establish breathing then gradually apply pressure through the footplate.  Inform the subject to notice the counter pressure that goes through the hips and lower back into the back pad.
Once the instructor has given the cue to begin the load up, there should be a quiet moment where the instructor is intently observing the actions.  If done properly, a simple “perfect” or “yes, just like that” is an opportunity for positive feedback.
CONCENTRIC:  Subject will move smoothly through the concentric touch and go at end stop, with the “click” at the moment that happens (or wherever strength and effort permit movement near the end of a set).  There is no pause at any point on a Leg Press.
ECCENTRIC:  After the load up and first concentric, and immediately after the click at the upper turn, the instructor may cue “ease out…do not speed up.”
LOWER TURN:  While the client is in the first eccentric phase of the set, the instructor must inform the client of what will constitute the lower turnaround and what the client is expected to do there.  In this case the client will “touch and go” or “be continuous at the bottom” or “barely touch, barely start” or “seamlessly change direction as the weights touch” or “soft touch, do not pause.”  All of those cues require the client to control their pace and increase their focus as they sense for the exact moment the weights touch.  Again, this creates a level of safety we require with our Continuous Tension protocol.  Remember, there is always a cue to give on the first eccentric of an exercise.
Keep hips down.  Do not allow the pelvis to roll up and/or tailbone to lift out of the seat.
One continuous pace with no perceivable pause at any point until concentric movement stalls.
Maintain posture, head position, pace, and knee path throughout.  Knees should track through the same path concentrically and eccentrically, to ensure consistent loading of target musculature and to keep the ankles, knees, and hips “stacked.”
And while we are encouraging the subject to maintain their pace, they should expect to have to increase their effort over the course of a set.  Effort does not remain constant.  In order to maintain a given pace with increasing fatigue, effort needs to voluntarily increase as a counter to the fatigue.  This is how stimulative mechanical tension is created.
NOTES
It may be necessary or beneficial to describe “gradual” to the subject (e.g. 20 pounds of pressure, 40 pounds, 60 pounds, eventually reaching enough force to begin moving).  Or have client imagine that there was 100 pounds on weight stack and they are to gradually find 101 pounds of pressure, or just enough to crack the weight stack.  Also remind them that this gradual load up may take 3 to 5 seconds before movement actually occurs.
There is no pause on a leg press.  It is one continuous effort.  Care should still be given to exaggerate control on the changes of direction (“drag out the turn” or “almost pause but don’t”).
If a clients’ feet slide up the footplate or the torso shifts up into shoulder pads, be attentive to ensure knees cannot lock out at upper turnaround (end stop).  If so, give a verbal cue and properly timed click to prevent a fully straightened knee.  Inform the client of this temporary change and consider adjusting settings for subsequent sets.
In general, a higher foot position will decrease knee flexion and increase hip flexion, resulting in a more glute biased movement.  A lower foot position will increase knee flexion and create more quad biased movement.  Both muscle groups will contribute to some degree however in either scenario.
As has been discussed throughout the Academy, it is imperative that the MSF Exercise Practitioner become keenly aware of how much intensity to provide each individual client on every exercise in each workout.  As a general rule, the newer, more deconditioned a client is, the less intensity is required to create a stimulus (i.e. positive effect).  So it will be in their best interest to introduce the concept of resistance training more conservatively.  Start lighter and teach them how to control the movement.  They’ll be better able to receive instruction when they’re not overwhelmed by the struggle.  We still absolutely need to teach them intensity and progress their effort but it will be a slower, longer process for these types.  Again, show the client that we care more about their workout than they do!  See more discussion on the progression of quality and effort in the point below.
Importantly, while learning the Continuous Tension protocol, the subject will most likely be using a relatively light weight and as a result will probably be capable of performing a higher number of reps, spending more time on the machine.  While this may seem conducive to learning, it can also be counterproductive from a discomfort standpoint.  Yes a big part of the learning curve is to be able to produce an effort while managing discomfort, but there can be diminishing returns in that the movement becomes intolerable before it is stimulative.  Ideally we should be striving for perfect form with “faster” reps (i.e. 6 second positive, 6 second negative) and a “heavier” weight that leads to failure in 10 or fewer reps.  While this may not be achievable or advisable in the initial sessions, as long as the subject is demonstrating a clear understanding of the control required, we may progress the intensity more quickly.
Further considerations for achieving a more glute biased setup on the Leg Press:
In general, if we want to feel/use the glutes more, we would want to increase hip flexion and decrease knee flexion.  So a more upright seat back is going to accomplish this.  P2 would be “more glutes” theoretically than P3.
In addition, raising the feet on the platform would act to decrease knee flexion, which would also make it "more glutes" theoretically.
We say ‘theoretically’ here because at the end of the day, some folks just aren't going to feel their glutes working no matter what and that's not uncommon particularly for that muscle group.  But the glutes are still working given the movement pattern.
Anytime we have a more upright position, there will be more hip flexion, which means there is also more spinal flexion, especially on the LP.  For some folks (i.e. spines) it may rise to a point where it is not tolerable.  In this case we would look to increase their gap, so it would make for a shallower lower turnaround.  But this is at odds with us wanting more hip flexion in the first place to bias the glutes.  However, if it is bothering the low back, we have to fix that first.
While we often structure client's workouts with Lumbar either first or second in the sequence, it is advisable to try and put as much space between it and the LP.  In fact, in cases where the client has a sensitive lower back, it may be best to pair the Lumbar with the Leg Extension and avoid the LP in the same workout.  Not because it is inherently dangerous, but there is a chance that the fatigue, or more specifically the "pump", felt from the Lumbar may be carried through to the LP where the spinal flexion will only exacerbate it.  If you’ve ever experienced this, you’ll know it is very uncomfortable.  But if we are going to include the Lumbar in the same workout as the LP (and again, that's totally acceptable), just make sure there are a few exercises in between to allow time for the pump to dissipate.
It may be that the client cannot tolerate P2 at all and that is fine.  It simply means we are going to have to use P3 and lose a little bit of the glute biasing advantage that P2 affords us.
Another consideration would be to perform ABD directly into LP to create a bit of a prefatigued situation for the glutes.  Even though they will be different fibers to some degree because they are different movement patterns, there will still be fatigue in the glute region that may help the client feel the glutes more on the LP.