Exercise Performance
Components of a Repetition
The smallest and arguably most important unit of measure of a workout is the individual repetition.  Every productive workout comes down to the quality of the reps performed that make up that workout.  Taking this a step further then, we can say that the long-term success of the program is largely attributable to the sum of these individual reps.  For this reason, we can assign the highest level of importance to mastering the execution of the protocol.  Simply stated, each subject should look to train better over time and understand that this happens on a rep to rep basis.  As an aside, “training better” takes into account a multitude of factors that are explained throughout the MSF Academy and are a primary objective of the client's journey with us.
For purposes of our insight and instruction, let’s consider the following components of a repetition, which can be viewed as a cycle of five distinct phases:
The gradual load up or the handoff are the only two ways that an exercise can begin using our methodology.  There is a detailed process to each of these techniques and the exercise should not begin without direction from the instructor.  The client must be held accountable to properly performing the initiation of each exercise.  The gradual load up along with the lower turnaround (discussed below) are quite possibly the two most critical elements of our protocol to be understood and mastered by our clients.  But more importantly, this understanding and mastery has to begin with the instructor.  Please review the Equipment and Instruction Scripts for the specifics [https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1f29em_iNFAcRRMwhtqW97VNOtd0Kc3wB?usp=drive_link]
The concentric (positive) phase of the movement is the lifting motion during which the target muscles contract and shorten, moving the joint(s) from the start point to the endpoint of the range of motion.
The eccentric (negative) phase of the movement is the lowering motion during which the target muscles stretch and lengthen, moving the joint(s) back from the endpoint to the start point of the range of motion.
The upper turnaround is the change of direction occurring after the concentric phase of the repetition and into the eccentric portion.  It also refers to the uppermost position of the weight stack in the range of motion of an exercise.
The lower turnaround is the change of direction occurring after the eccentric portion of the repetition and into the concentric portion.  It also refers to the lowermost position of the weight stack in the range of motion of an exercise.
Changes of direction, or “turnarounds”, are a critical aspect of exercise performance when it comes to safety and efficient muscular loading.  This is where the potential for acceleration, and therefore increased force and momentum, is greatest.  In fact, turnaround performance is more important than repetition speed alone and is the single most important attribute to master in properly performed exercise.
The lower turnaround performance for most exercises is treated with a perpetual, “touch and go” motion, where the weights being lifted would lightly touch the remaining weights not being lifted from the weight stack.  The exception would be compound pulling exercises where the machine’s range of motion exceeds the involved joint’s range of motion (i.e. the elbows straighten prior to the weights touching).  Most clients and even some trainers are going to underappreciate the detail, skill, and effort required to perform a proper lower turnaround, but this cannot be an afterthought.  A properly performed lower turnaround (along with the gradual load up) drives proper exercise at MSF, and the Exercise Practitioner must master the technique themselves.   But more importantly, they must be able to persistently teach and enforce this concept to our clients.
A proper upper turnaround varies between two different techniques depending on the type of exercise being performed.  For some exercises, the subject will simply “pass-through” the upper turnaround in one continuous motion (similar to the lower turn).  For other exercises, a squeeze technique, or a brief period of increasing effort in the contracted position, is performed before lowering the weight.  The application of these methods is detailed more thoroughly at a later point in the manual.
As a reminder, exercises that typically have a squeeze technique are single joint movements and compound pulling exercises. Importantly, the instructor should be attentive to the need to instruct exactly HOW to squeeze on a given exercise rather than just relying on the command "squeeze." The word alone does not describe how to do it and most will likely act to clench their fists.
If we consider the leg extension, for example, we might instruct the subject to "continue to straighten the knee" or "attempt to straighten the knee further" in the contracted position (even though further movement is not possible). By attempting to straighten the knee further, the quadriceps will be forced to contract harder thus accomplishing the squeeze we are seeking. These are the details that MSF Exercise Practitioners are consistently looking to improve (Kaizen).