Exercise Performance
Speed of Movement (Pace)
Repetitions are performed slowly enough to allow for a smooth reversal of direction between the positive and negative phases of movement (turnaround technique) while allowing the trainee to maintain proper posture, positioning and/or alignment throughout the exercise.  Reversing direction smoothly prevents potentially harmful increases in force that can result from sudden movement and helps maintain continuous tension on the targeted muscles.  It also protects against the all too common tendency to instinctively unload and then abruptly load back up again in an effort to escape the mounting discomfort.  This is one of the more dangerous discrepancies as there tends to be a lack of awareness while this sudden act is happening.
An approximate 12 to 20-second repetition cycle, consisting of a 6 to 10-second positive, followed by a brief pause in the contracted position or continuous upper turnaround,  and then a 6 to 10-second negative, followed by a continuous lower turnaround, appears to be adequately slow for this purpose.  A slower repetition cycle is beneficial when instructing novice trainees or when working with trainees with injuries or conditions requiring extra caution.
When introducing a client to the protocol or a new exercise, a verbal cadence count can be used to assist the client in experiencing the feel of a properly controlled movement.  Using an occasional cadence for experienced clients if they begin to move too slowly or too quickly can also be helpful.
A shorter (closer to 6) or longer (closer to 10) cadence count is acceptable for exercises with shorter or longer ranges of motion, respectively; however, to avoid confusing the client, it is best to use a consistent repetition cadence whenever possible.  And more importantly, the speed of movement should be the same on both the concentric and eccentric phases of a repetition.  Importantly, while subjects are encouraged to maintain their pace, one cannot and should not expect their EFFORT to remain constant.  In other words, if we are to maintain a given pace in an activity with increasing fatigue, our effort needs to voluntarily increase to counter that fatigue.  This is how stimulative mechanical tension is created.  This is what makes resistance training effective.
In this way, pace governs effort.  As the subject senses their movement bogging down, they should be encouraged to push harder to maintain the pace.  There’s a point in the set where the subject is no longer moving slowly because they’re supposed to move slowly (voluntarily).  They’re moving slowly because they are beginning to fatigue and could not speed up (involuntarily).
It’s not enough to move slowly until we can no longer move at the selected pace or because we can no longer tolerate the discomfort.  It is critical to recognize this and to provide the proper encouragement and teaching points as we help our clients cultivate this ability to train harder.  And while we’re on the topic of discomfort, by focusing instead on one’s pace, it may help to get beyond the adverse feelings that often lead to the premature ending of sets.
Also of note, as a client becomes more advanced, it will likely be in their best interest to move closer to the 6-second pace.  A faster pace will be easier to control and will afford a smoother repetition (with practice).  It will also create less discomfort which as we know will allow for a higher level of effort.  As mentioned, this will take practice and may take months to fully implement.
It cannot be said enough, that this faster pace may NOT be for every client.  Only those that show an understanding, a tolerance, and an above average competency to maintain their quality while training at this higher intensity.  There will still be situations where a slower, closer to 10-second pace will be optimal and a faster pace should never be forced.  At the end of the day, the safety of each individual client is our main priority.