Exercise Performance
Rest Intervals Between Exercises (...Not What We Were Led to Believe)
A common belief and practice in the high-intensity realm is that workouts should be conducted with as little rest or downtime as possible in between exercises.  The intent behind this strategy is multifaceted.  The primary reasoning is based on the faulty belief that fatigue is a necessary component in creating a hypertrophy stimulus.  Basically, if one were to rush through a workout, they would create more fatigue, resulting in a stronger stimulus.  But fatigue is not a stimulus for hypertrophy, in fact it is a hindrance that will diminish the effect of the workout as is explained below.
Another reason HIT practitioners have recommended maintaining a brisk pace throughout the workout is for purposes of safety.  The theory is that by never fully recovering from one exercise to the other, the subject will be challenged with less weight.  And on the surface, a lighter load is probably safer.  But let’s consider the following logic.  Firstly, we need to remember that the service we provide at MSF is dedicated strength training.  Because of this, we must approach our workouts in a manner that optimizes the physiology of stimulating strength and hypertrophy.  We do not want to turn our workouts into cardio sessions.  This means challenging the body up to and beyond its current strength capabilities.  Well, anything that reduces our output during a workout will result in an effort that is below the body’s current capabilities, which will not be stimulative toward strength or hypertrophy.
The net effect of training in a fatigued state is that our motor unit recruitment (MUR) will be greatly diminished.  Importantly, as a protective mechanism, our nervous system will not sustain a high level of effort in an increasingly fatigued state.  It governs this by limiting the signal sent from the Central Motor Command of the brain, which activates our motor units (i.e. muscle fibers).  This is not a matter of will, it is a matter of physiology.  Yes, with consistent training we can become more fatigue resistant, but in the moment, we must do what is necessary to maximize our current capacity to recruit motor units.  Remember, if a motor unit is not first activated, its muscle fibers cannot be stimulated.
With this in mind, it makes sense to allow for some recovery between sets of exercise.  “Recovery” in this case will most likely be cardiorespiratory.  Essentially we should allow the clients to at least begin to catch their breath.  While they may not fully return to resting levels because of time and deconditioning, it should still begin to normalize after 60 - 120 seconds or so.  The extent to which their breathing does not fully normalize will be the fatigue resistance or “cardio” benefit that is stimulated to improve over time.  Keep in mind, this will not be something that we will time necessarily, but rather use observation and good judgement.  The main point here is just to make sure that we do not rush between movements.  We should seek the highest level of output from each individual exercise, while recognizing that fatigue is not entirely avoidable.
One last consideration on the topic of intra-workout recovery would be the specific exercises selected and the sequence we choose to run them in.  If we are performing larger compound movements (think Big 5) and put them back to back to back, it is going to create substantially more oxygen debt.  We would want to allow for more time between these movements than we would if we put a biceps curl after adduction for example.  So keep this in mind along with watching for feedback while instructing a workout.  Also, movements that affect one another directly, like in a designed prefatigue, will absolutely reduce performance of the second in the pairing (e.g. chest flye into chest press).  That is not to say we would never use a prefatigue, but it would have to be used selectively and for the right reasons.  Otherwise, splitting up the overlapping exercises would result in a higher level of effort, which results in a more profound stimulus.  It may also be the difference between creating a stimulus and not creating one.  So program the workouts intelligently and watch closely to how they play out on the studio floor.  Make adjustments based on the findings and discuss them with your team.  Kaizen!