Exercise Performance
Range of Motion - Individualized and Constantly Evaluated
Exercises are performed through the safest and most effective range of motion for each individual on every movement.  The range of motion used is specific to the client and the exercise and should be constantly evaluated by the instructor; even for advanced clients that may have used a particular piece of equipment dozens of times. Exercise Practitioners are always looking for ways to optimize the clients' experience.
Safe range of motion refers to the distance over which the involved muscles and joints are not exposed to potentially harmful forces, or the range over which an individual does not experience pain due to an existing injury or physical condition.  For example, the start position (and lower turnaround) on the seated leg curl is set to avoid hyperextending the knee.
If a client's tolerable range of motion on an exercise is limited due to injury, pain, or lack of flexibility, the range of motion of the machine should be adjusted to accommodate this. This should be clearly indicated on the client's chart along with all other settings and updated for any changes over time. Keep in mind that as a trainee gains strength on an exercise where they were previously limited, the range of motion may be increased as a form of progression.
Effective range of motion refers to the range over which the target muscles encounter meaningful and balanced resistance.  For example, the targeted muscles of the frontal thighs encounter little resistance as the knee approaches the extended position on the leg press.  In fact, it is likely that the muscles actually unload and rest to some extent with the load being supported by the bones.  As a result, excessive knee extension should be avoided on the leg press as it falls outside of the effective range.  Compare that to a leg extension where the quadriceps are in their most contracted position as the knee straightens.  In this case, we want to take advantage of this by having the subject straighten the knee as fully as possible to create more meaningful tension.
The range of motion used may need to be adjusted at any moment for any client, given any number of variables discussed throughout the manual. The instructor should be proactively attentive to creating the most optimal experience for every client on every exercise of every workout.  This is another element of the Exercise Practitioner's expertise that needs to be mastered as they continue to develop their craft.