Exercise Performance
Turnaround Technique (Change of Direction)
Proper turnaround performance varies depending on the characteristics of the start and endpoints of an exercise and whether mechanical or anatomical structures or leverage factors limit the range of motion.  Turnaround performance should prevent the unloading of target muscles and avoid placing the involved joints or muscular structures in potentially harmful positions.
When the equipment used allows the resistance source to be set down and unloaded at the start point, such as the weights being lifted touching the weights not being lifted on a selectorized machine, the trainee should:
Reduce speed as the weight approaches the start point (lower turnaround) during the negative enough to ensure a minimized impact.  Ultimately we are looking for exaggerated control in the most challenging part of the movement.
Allow the weights lifted to touch the remaining weights in the stack without being set down or unloading the target musculature.  This ensures a consistent and full range of motion.
Immediately but slowly begin the positive phase of the movement.  This is commonly instructed as “barely touch, barely start,” “touch and go,” or "be continuous."
This is the situation that would occur for all compound pushing movements (e.g. leg press, chest press, overhead press) and most single-joint or rotary exercises (e.g. leg extension, leg curl, lateral raise).
When the range of motion of the equipment used exceeds the trainee’s range of motion and the negative movement is limited by the involved joint structures, the trainee should:
Reduce speed as the involved joint approaches the position of the lower turnaround.  This helps prevent the joint from being forced beyond its tolerable range of motion.
Immediately but slowly begin the positive phase of the movement.
In a compound row or a pulldown, for example, the elbow joint would most likely straighten completely before the weights being lifted bottomed out.  This would define the lower turnaround, and the change of direction would happen as the elbow joint straightened.
When the range of motion of the equipment used exceeds the trainee’s range of motion and the negative movement is limited by the flexibility of the involved muscular structures, the trainee should:
Reduce speed as the weight approaches the start point (lower turnaround).
Carefully enter into an abbreviated, moderate stretch.
Immediately but slowly begin the positive phase of the movement.
An example of this might be a valgus elbow that doesn’t allow for complete straightening at the lower turn.  In this case, the subject would extend the elbow up to a point that is tolerable and then change directions.  Another example would be a subject’s knee that won’t fully extend on a leg extension.  In this case, a less than normal range of motion is acceptable.
When the equipment used limits positive movement, such as a leg press with a range limiter, or end stop, to prevent full knee extension, the trainee should:
Reduce speed as the movement arm approaches the end point (upper turnaround) during the positive phase of movement in order to minimize impact force.
Upon reaching the endpoint, the trainee will barely touch or “pass through” the upper turnaround (similar treatment to the lower turnaround).
Immediately but slowly begin the negative phase of the movement.  Keeping the movement continuous throughout is the goal.
When performing a compound pulling movement or simple movement that provides meaningful resistance at the end of the positive range of motion (i.e. contracted position), the trainee should:
Reduce speed as the movement arm approaches the finished position to minimize momentum.
Pause definitely and briefly (one or two seconds) in the finished position.  This is known as the contracted position.
Gradually ease out of the contracted position.
Slowly begin the negative.
After a continuous lower turnaround and starting with the third repetition, the trainee focuses on intensely contracting the target muscles by keeping the movement arm and body completely still.  This is known as the "squeeze technique" and is employed from the third rep on and should generally last for 2 to 3 seconds before easing out.  This is simply another way to create mechanical tension in the targeted musculature.
If the range of motion of the involved joints or muscular structures exceeds the range over which the target muscles are meaningfully loaded, the trainee should:
Begin the turnaround as soon as the load noticeably begins to decrease to avoid unloading.  Examples of this would include changing direction before the shoulders are unloaded at the lower turnaround of a dumbbell lateral raise and turning around before full extension during compound pushing movements, as in a bodyweight squat.  Some abdominal machines can be moved with the limbs beyond the point of a fully contracted abdomen, but this situation will almost never occur on properly designed selectorized machines.  The Exercise Practitioner must be aware of this and ensure that the movements are performed in the most optimal range.
In all cases described above, there is one common attribute; a smooth and continuous lower turnaround.  And in most cases, the upper turnaround should be smooth and continuous as well.  This may very well be THE most important concept in the execution of the MSF Continuous Tension method.