Exercise Performance
Exercise Induced Headaches (EIH)
Before we get started with our discussion on Exercise Performance, we need to point out a rare but concerning phenomenon that has occurred in our high-intensity strength training circle for decades. It is what's termed an Exercise Induced Headache.
An EIH is a headache caused or associated with exertion during strength training.  It is commonly described by many sufferers as starting as dull, low-intensity head pain or stiffness in the back of the head.  If exercise continues, the pain can intensify and radiate over the top of the head and into the orbit of one eye.  The most likely theory that exists is that it is the result of a backup of venous return causing overflow and swelling in emissary veins in the skull leading to a “pressure headache”.
It has been our experience that EIH’s rarely occur but if one does appear it is usually during one of the first few workouts or later as the subject progressively increases their intensity of effort.  There also seems to be some correlation to breath holding (ValSalva) during higher levels of exertion.
Importantly, an EIH does not cause long term issues or injury and will often dissipate if the exercise is terminated immediately at the slightest sense of any head pain.  For this reason, the possibility for an EIH must be introduced to all clients during the consultation as prevention is the best option.
Here are the action steps to be followed by instructors and communicated to a client as a means of prevention or in dealing with the onset of symptoms:
During the consultation, let the client know that an EIH is rare but possible.  Ask the client to report any headache that they may already have prior to their session or if one develops during the workout.
SAFELY and immediately unload the weight and explain what you are feeling to your trainer.
Realize your instructor will not know what you are experiencing, so you must take the responsibility to stop the exercise.
The client  should sit on the machine or somewhere comfortable to relax.  Keep the feet and legs below the heart and do not talk.  Keep eyes closed and head still with head supported if needed for two minutes.  Sometimes moving to a dark room can help if the client has become light sensitive.  The trainer should stay with the client.
The client must be unable to even imagine the head pain for the workout to continue.  If the pain does not completely vanish, terminate the workout.  Several days later, attempt another workout only if the head pain is non-existent.  If pain persists, consult a physician.
If you do experience an EIH there are several options within the exercise routine to help avoid them.
Drop the exercise they experienced the EIH on for several weeks. If it happened on Leg Press (most likely) do that exercise last once re-introduced. For the reintroduction of the leg press, to do so at a lowered intensity ( less weight and/or fewer reps).  Remind the client to breathe freely, especially at the lower turnaround and as the intensity increases.
If an EIH occurs again, drop the exercise for the foreseeable future and take extra precaution to carefully progress client on all exercises.
Going forward then failure must be redefined in each exercise.  Terminate the exercise not when concentric failure is reached, but at the very instant that the slightest head pain is sensed.  Then repeat the previous steps above.
Subsequent workouts will have the new redefined failure point of imagined head pain.
It may be beneficial to start each routine with Cervical Extension to increase blood flow through the neck and upper back.  It may also help to fatigue the neck musculature.
Keep accurate records to pinpoint exactly where the EIH occurs.  Note whether it is consistently on the same exercise or at the same point repetition-wise.  Avoid this exercise entirely as suggested above or this level of intensity by staying below this repetition count for subsequent workouts.  Gradually reintroduce the exercise and/or the intensity by building back up slowly.  Eventually, the entire workout should be completed without any sign of an EIH.  This may take weeks of carefully tracked reintroduction but this has been a successful approach in just about every instance.