Exercise Performance
Set Duration (Number of Repetitions)
Typically, we aim to perform somewhere between 6 to 10 repetitions before reaching concentric failure in a set of exercise.  When learning a new exercise, the expected set duration will likely be a little longer than in most other situations.  Anywhere from 8 to 15 repetitions may be more optimal in this case.  Lighter weight and higher repetitions lend themselves to a more meaningful learning experience for the client.  It provides an opportunity to focus more easily on the details of the protocol, to take direction, and to exhibit the exaggerated control of movement we are seeking.  As the client becomes more proficient at performing the exercise, the load will likely be increased, but not every workout and not indefinitely.  It’s also the last variable of progressive overload that should be increased, as will be discussed later.
For the majority of intermediate and advanced level subjects, set durations where the trainee is unable to complete at least five reps is an indication that the weight may be too heavy.  For the upper limit, the intermediate or advanced subject should be expected to reach muscular failure (or as close as is tolerable) within 10 repetitions at the most, otherwise the load may be too light.  Importantly, these parameters are not set in stone but rather guidance put in place to facilitate load selection.  We want each exercise to be challenging but still well within the client’s control.
Clients who may respond better to shorter set durations may have difficulty continuing an exercise beyond a particular number of reps.  This may be due to the predominance of a muscle fiber type, psychological factors, or afferent feedback from the working muscles (i.e. extreme discomfort or 'burning").  These are just some of the reasons higher repetition sets can be considered less than optimal.
Some clients may benefit from longer set durations.   For them, their form may begin to deteriorate if the resistance level is progressed too quickly and their set duration is reduced below a certain point.  Or, in keeping with the above, this could also be due to fiber makeup or psychological profile.  There are a good number of people that simply don't like the feeling of physical exertion, and a perceived "heavy" weight will exacerbate this.  These clients need to be instructed and progressed differently than those that thrive with a physical challenge.  But in most of these cases, the intensity adverse subjects can learn to tolerate and even fully accept the demands of resistance training.  This is an attribute of exercise progression that one should attempt to improve on every rep of every exercise of every workout.  This may also be the most challenging aspect of resistance training to teach and master; to overcome the aversion to intense muscular effort.
Again, repetitions should always be performed continuously, with every effort made to avoid unloading the target muscles.  Repetitions are performed until the client is unable to continue positive movement with proper form, thus achieving full motor unit recruitment and meaningful mechanical tension.