Exercise Performance
Gradual Load-up
For all compound pushing movements and most single-joint movements, the subject begins the exercise by lifting the weight from a dead stop in the stretched position.  It is critical that the initial application of force, or load-up, be performed with the most attentive focus on being gradual or incremental with the pressure applied.
Most trainees produce a sudden exertion while simultaneously holding their breath (Valsalva) in order to get the movement started most efficiently.  This is an instinctive measure taken by the body as it is in a biomechanically disadvantaged position.  Clients will often exclaim, "I needed to make sure I could lift it."  Or sometimes the opposite will happen where a subject will push abruptly and then instantly stop if the load doesn't move immediately.  At this point, they'll tell their trainer that they "can't lift the weight."
In either case, they have already forgotten the REAL OBJECTIVE of resistance training that was taught during the consultation; to create mechanical tension in as many muscle fibers (motor unit recruitment) of the targeted musculature as possible.  It is imperative for the trainer to remind or re-teach the client how to properly initiate an exercise that begins from an unloaded, dead stop.
Assuming the selected weight is appropriate, and the client is properly positioned and braced, there needs to be a GRADUAL application of force concurrent with a continuous and free breathing pattern.  The subject needs to "go through their gears," so to speak, in an attempt to find the minimum level of force required to actually begin lifting the load.  This should take several seconds or longer, depending on the magnitude of the load.  Reassure them that it is in their best interest to take the challenge of proper resistance training seriously, and the load-up, in particular, to make the exercise significantly safer and more effective.
By attempting to master the GRADUAL LOAD-UP, the trainee will be able to get a better effect by creating more tension with less weight, thus reducing risk.  They should also strive to make this gradual load-up a priority so as to control another variable in the progressive overload of exercise.  If one were to suddenly apply force while holding their breath, they would more easily lift the weight, which may cause the trainer to believe a load increase is warranted.  This would be premature, however, and would likely lead to deteriorating form and lack of control of the movement and could expose the client to excessive loading.
To illustrate this gradual load-up, let us consider the leg extension.  Note that the first 15-30 degrees in the leg extension movement occurs almost at once if not closely controlled.  Meaningful tension is then obviated by the momentum employed to begin the exercise.  If not properly instructed and enforced by the trainer, this habit will only worsen over time, leading to ineffective and potentially dangerous exercise.  Instead, consider the following mental imagery to help learn how to properly apply a gradual effort:
Sit on the leg extension machine in the start position.  Suppose that the load on the machine is set to 100lbs.  With no intention to move right away, start to slightly push the shins into the tibia pad thus engaging the quadriceps muscles.  Try and produce a minimal effort of only 10 lbs and note that as expected, there is no movement.
Now gradually begin to increase the force to 20 lbs; then 30; then 40; then 50.  At this point, you might notice the tibia pads begin to compress from the applied pressure.  Continue to increase the force to 60 lbs; then 70; then 80; then 90; then 100.  Still, no movement occurs and again this is all by design and needs to be expected.
Then apply 101 lbs of force.  After the tibia pad fully compresses, the belts/cables tighten, the body sinks into the seat and slightly contorts, the movement arm flexes and when just enough force is applied, the movement arm (and load) will begin to move.  In other words, all of the slack in the system, both in the machine and the body, must be taken out through tightening or compressing before movement can occur.  This is the level of detail that the subject needs to understand and practice to properly learn the gradual load up.
This entire mental picture is applied over a time frame of 3 or more seconds.  For exercises with larger loads, like a leg press, a properly performed load-up may take 5 seconds or more.  Regardless of the actual time taken, the concept is the same; a gradual buildup of force resulting in a gradual introduction of mechanical tension to the targeted muscles.  The Exercise Practitioner must make every effort to reinforce this critical concept of the MSF Continuous Tension protocol to ensure the safety and improve the effectiveness of our client's experience.