Basic Principles of Exercise
Progression - The Mastery of Effort
As the body adapts by becoming stronger and thus more capable and fit, it requires a more physically challenging stimulus in order to continue to improve.  This progressive challenge does not automatically come about with more weight or sets or reps. In other words, more volume, or performing more of something does not create a greater degree of mechanical tension.  Additionally, lifting more weight does not necessarily create more mechanical tension or an increased internal stimulus. Oftentimes a trainee will alter their form or use momentum or other discrepancies to lift more weight.  As you will learn throughout this manual, more tension also comes about through a qualitatively optimized, more efficient, more focused, more volitionally directed effort.  In other words, a more intense effort with greater control usually equates to a greater internal stimulus. [Keep in mind that mechanical tension, muscular tension, and internal stimulus are synonymous as used throughout this manual].
This qualitative effort is the single most important factor that one should look to progress when strength training. It is also not something that should be expected to come quickly or naturally. On the contrary, this ability will need to be practiced and developed over months and years.  This should be viewed as a positive attribute in that it ensures a sustainably long potential for progress and adaptation across a multitude of variables.  And this is really where the instructor should continue to steer the clients' focus over time.  The instructor's ability to help the client conceptualize this then becomes a critical tool in retention.  We are not basing our protocol or the client's success on quantitative elements but rather the mastery of their effort.
It is important to note here that this idea of "progress" is one of the more critical concepts that an Exercise Practitioner needs to be able to interpret, convey, and cultivate to and among our client base.  The instructor and client need to understand that the load being lifted is the last variable of progression to be advanced.  The execution of every inch of every exercise should be the primary focus of every workout. In other words, get better at training hard. And this is best accomplished by intently following the Exercise Practitioner's instruction.
If one were to simply improve the actual performance of an exercise by controlling their speed, changes of direction, breathing, demeanor, focus, timing of effort, etc., all while keeping the same load, they would most likely be creating more mechanical tension, thus creating a stimulus for growth.  So by exaggerating one's control over the movements and looking to make that the priority in every workout, they not only create a stimulus but they make the workouts safer as well.
One last note on mastering progression in training…the real limiter to continued progress is one’s maximum tolerable perception of effort.  Basically how difficult or even threatening each subject perceives their current level of effort.  Once the maximum level is reached, the brain will not recruit any more motor units (muscle fibers) and the exercise movement will cease.  Importantly, this maximum level of perceived effort can increase over time and the best way to go about improving here is simply by training more.  Simply stated, training more will help a subject tolerate higher levels of effort.  This is great news for anyone looking to continue to make progress and is the primary reason our clients should remain clients for the rest of their lives!