Basic Principles of Exercise
Introduction
In simple terms, Exercise Science studies how physical activity affects the human body.  This has become an increasingly important field in recent years due to the growing public awareness of the importance of maintaining a healthy lifestyle.  And one of the most beneficial areas of study within Exercise Science is strength training, which involves using resistance to build muscular strength and endurance.
At MaxStrength Fitness, we specialize in strength training using a unique approach that emphasizes mechanical tension (MT) and progressive overload.  Mechanical tension is the pulling force experienced by the active muscle fibers during physical activity and is physiologically required for stimulating hypertrophy and strength gains.  Progressive overload refers to the gradually increasing capacity of a workout that are evidenced by and a result of an increase in strength. With a stronger muscle, a higher level of mechanical tension is now permitted and required to stimulate further strength gains.  Although a consistently similar effort without necessarily increasing has proven to be enough to maintain strength, it's desirable to attempt to continuously train harder to optimize results. So our immediate goal of any workout would be to increase the number of motor units we are activating, which is known as Motor Unit Recruitment (MUR). The more motor units we can recruit through higher levels of effort, the more muscle fibers we are stimulating, thereby increasing the potential benefits of the exercise.
We create this mechanical tension, or muscular loading, using a highly focused movement protocol performed on specially designed resistance training equipment that properly tracks muscle and joint function.  This equipment, along with our protocol and expert instruction, allows us to precisely target specific movement patterns, which, in turn, target specific muscle fibers and ensures the resistance is applied safely and effectively.
Our uniquely developed protocol, known as the MSF Continuous Tension method, takes full advantage of our equipment and leverages the current understanding of the mechanisms that create meaningful muscular tension.  The cornerstone of our Continuous Tension method is a relatively slow and continuous speed of movement.  We utilize a window of 6 to 10 seconds to lift (concentric) and 6 to 10 seconds to lower (eccentric) the resistance on every exercise.  Of even greater importance is the careful and continuous change of direction between the eccentric and concentric phases of the movement.  This exaggerated control reduces the momentum and sudden forces instinctively used by most trainees, simultaneously reducing the risks and increasing the effectiveness of lifting weights. A common expression used at MSF is that our protocol is designed to make exercise harder AND safer.