Basic Principles of Exercise
Progressive Overload and Intensity
Progressive Overload (PO) is the demonstration or evidence of an increase in strength performance as a result of the improvement of the physiological mechanisms responsible for strength increases. More simply stated, it is something we've achieved in this workout that we could not have done in the previous workout. It will only be apparent in one or two ways. Either using more load for the same number of reps or more reps with the same load. Both conditions would also require at least consistent form/quality or better. Completing a rep with poor form or using momentum or any number of discrepancies cannot be used to confidently substantiate that a strength gain has taken place. More importantly this approach to training is likely to deteriorate over time and carries with it a heightened risk of injury both acute and long-term.
The commonly held belief about Progressive Overload is that it is something that is "ensured" or forced by lifting more weight or performing more reps in each successive workout. Some trainers and influencers even suggest that you will achieve PO by adding more sets (increasing volume). But none of these suggestions are true. None of these actions will ensure a strength gain. Remember PO is the ability to do something that wasn't possible before. It is made possible as a result of a strength gain. And adding more sets only requires more time not more strength.
It is imperative that every MSF Exercise Practitioner clearly understand the specifics of these commonly used industry terms. Even more importantly, we should understand how to apply these concepts in the context of our methodology. In the case of PO, we need to first understand HOW it happens. Physiologically speaking, PO is the result of an increase in strength. Strength, however, is not an adaptation itself but rather an outcome of multiple adaptations. Most notably:
Increase in Motor Unit Recruitment (MUR)
Improved coordination and skill
Decreased coactivation of antagonists
Hypertrophy