Basic Principles of Exercise
Volume
Training volume can be measured in many ways but most commonly refers to the amount of work performed during a training session, usually consisting of the total number of sets and reps in a workout.  Importantly, there is an inverse relationship between intensity of effort and volume of work or exercise that can be performed.  The higher the intensity of a set of exercise, the lower the volume a person can perform, tolerate, and recover from. Furthermore, as the volume in a singular workout increases, the effect or benefit of the subsequent sets and exercises decreases.  This is due to both central nervous system fatigue as well as peripheral fatigue experienced locally by the working muscles.  The accumulating fatigue causes an interference as a protective mechanism in the form of reduced motor unit recruitment and mechanical tension; the two physiological characteristics required for a hypertrophic stimulus.
The research comparing the effectiveness of varying volume per exercise shows no significant difference between performing one, two, three, or more sets for the majority of trainees, and empirical evidence suggests fewer sets are more effective at higher levels of intensity as discussed above.  And if performed properly, more than two sets of any given exercise would not be desirable by most or even possible for some of the more advanced trainees.  This is why only one set per exercise is performed utilizing our Continuous Tension method.  We will discuss the specific situations a client may perform more than one set later in the module.
To keep the overall workout volume low, and therefore improve the ability to maintain a high intensity, the number of exercises should be limited to the least required.  Each workout (or workout rotation) should effectively address all of the major muscle groups and any smaller muscle groups important to the trainee's goals, without accumulating what is known as "junk volume".  For a majority of subjects, this will be between 5 to 8 exercises total, with the higher number of exercises usually reserved for more advanced trainees and consisting of several smaller, less systemically demanding movements.
It is also important to note here that many novice or inexperienced trainees will feel the need to perform more exercises as they will most certainly (and incorrectly) believe that more exercise is better.  This seems to be the universal belief of the majority about exercise.  It is imperative that the Exercise Practitioner continually educate the client that it is NOT volume or the number of exercises that drives the physiological benefits we seek but rather the intensity of their effort.  Again, bring their attention back to the quality of their execution, the mastery and tolerance of their effort.
Novice trainees are unlikely to have the ability or focus to truly create a high-intensity effort but that alone does not preclude the exercise from being beneficial.  The requirement for a productive stimulus is significantly lower in an untrained or novice subject, and oftentimes the slightest amount of controlled exertion will be novel enough to suffice.  But as the subject gains experience and exposes themselves to more and more stimulus (training), the intensity of effort becomes paramount.  This concept needs to be emphasized by the trainer and made the primary point of focus as the client progresses over their training life.  Again, it is the intensity of the effort that produces the stimulus for change, not the volume or "amount" of exercise.