Benefits of Resistance Training
Body Composition
A leaner body is often more capable, mobile, and enduring.  Excess body fat is non-productive weight the body must work to carry all day long.  Excess body fat increases fatigue, reduces the ability to move efficiently, and inhibits range of motion. Not to mention the multitude of obesity-related health issues that plague our society.
Resistance training is the most effective form of exercise for fat loss.  Increasing muscle tissue is the only way to effectively increase your resting metabolic rate.  Although various steady-state activities such as aerobics and jogging are often recommended for fat loss, these activities burn few calories relative to the time invested and do little or nothing to maintain, much less increase muscle mass.  If over-done, these activities may even cause a loss of muscle tissue, effectively reducing your metabolism along with all of the benefits that come along with having or building muscle tissue.
While your body also burns additional calories during resistance training, the increase in muscle it stimulates has a far greater and longer-lasting effect on your metabolism.  The more muscle you have, the more calories your body burns 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
Muscle tissue is the most metabolically active tissue in the body.  Every pound of muscle has the potential to utilize up to 50 calories per day.[¹]  This is equivalent to 1,500 calories per month.  By adding 2.34 pounds of muscle, a person raises their metabolic rate by 3,500 calories per month, which is equivalent to a pound of energy.
It is necessary to perform resistance training while on a reduced-calorie diet to avoid indiscriminate weight loss.[2]  When dietary calories are reduced without performing resistance training, the weight is lost from fat, bone, and muscle tissue, effectively reducing metabolism and leaving one highly susceptible to eventual fat gain.
[1]  Illner, K., G. Brinkmann, M. Heller, A. Bosy-Westphal, and M.J. Muller.  Metabolically active components of fat-free mass and resting energy expenditure in nonobese adults.  Am j Physiol Endocrinol Metab. Feb; 278(2):E308-15, 2000.
[2] Bryner, R.W., I.H. Ullrich, J. Sauers, D. Donley, G. Hornsby, M Kolar, and  R. Yeater.  Effects of resistance vs. aerobic training combined with an 800 calorie liquid diet on lean body mass and resting metabolic rate.  J Am Coll Nutr.  Apr; 18(2): 115-21.