Abdominals - MSF Comprehensive Overview
Target Muscles:
Rectus Abdominis (Abs) - Spinal Flexion/Posterior Pelvic Tilt
Synergists:
External Obliques - Spinal Flexion
Transverse Abdominis - Hollowing (supports abdominal wall)
Pelvic Floor (in coordination with TA) - Pelvis stabilization
Rectus Femoris (Rec Fem) - Hip Flexion
Psoas -Hip Flexion
Considerations for setup:
The weight stack should be set prior to the client entering.  A standard gap of 6 will most likely be used although this may vary from machine to machine and will be decided by the location’s Studio Leader and MSF Corporate.
Ensure the movement arm (roller pad) is in the upright and locked position.  The movement arm will only rest in the forward position.  While it can be pushed back (away from the weight stack) it will not stay in that position.  The instructor needs to take extra precaution in controlling the position of the movement arm throughout the set and especially during entry/exit.
Determine height of the seat pad, by having the client palpate and point to the iliac crest (point of the hip).  This should align approximately with the level of the roller pad at the back of the seat.  This is the theoretical alignment for this exercise.  In theory, this will optimally align the axis of rotation of the machine with the axis of rotation of the body, near the top of the pelvis.  See the following point for the practical alignment considerations.
From a practical standpoint, the instructor should still take into consideration the height of the subject and/or the relative size of the hip girdle and surrounding tissues.  In either case, there is a possibility where there will be a substantial shift in the center of gravity, giving the subject more mass above the movement arm of the machine.  They become more top heavy in a sense.  This will create additional leverage that does not come from the targeted musculature and can lead to a false sense of progression.  As a result, there is a likelihood that the subject will require more weight, simultaneously making the exercise less effective with more risk.
So yes, the theoretical alignment of having the top of the iliac crest in line with the top of the roller pad will be the best starting point.  It will also often be the most optimal setting.  The point here is that the instructor needs to be attentive to the size and proportion of each individual client in making the final determination in a practical sense.
The next consideration is the foot placement on the fixed footplate.  This will determine the knee angle that we are trying to match to the angle of the femur restraint (knee pad).  Ensure the femur restraint is unwound and moved away from the seat to allow room for the client to enter.
Alert client to the movement arm to ensure that they do not run into it while entering the seat.  Instructor should keep the movement arm (roller pad) in the locked position during entry/exit and move it to the rearmost position.  The instructor will have to HOLD THE MOVEMENT ARM IN THIS POSITION AS IT WILL FALL FORWARD IF NOT SECURED.
The feet should be located so that when the feet are placed on the platform the angle of the knee is approximately congruent to the angle of the femur restraint.  This will result in the pads sitting flush against the tibia and femur.
With the foot placement established, the femur restraint should be positioned and tightened down so that the pads basically straddle the knees evenly (i.e. the patella should be approximately centered in the opening between the two pad, with one pad sitting above the knee on the femur and the other resting below the knee along the tibia).
The pads should be snug enough to allow a little bit of wiggle room against the leg but not enough that there is a space or gap.
With the lower body secure, the next step will be to unlock the movement arm (roller pad) and carefully lower it into position.  Instruct the client to lean back and be ready for the roller pad to pass in front of their face.  As this happens, the client should lift their arms up and over the top of the roller pad so that it sits in their armpits or as close as they can comfortably get it.  Have the client bring their elbows closer together and place their hands up in front of their head in a “prayer” position.
This movement will start at the upper turnaround in the contracted position.  The instructor will assist the movement arm and client down to this point.  Standing behind the client and grabbing the movement arm instruct the client to curl down and tighten their abdomen as you push the movement arm forward and down to reach this position.
Posture/Get Set:
This exercise requires an interpersonal transfer of the load where the client will increase their effort (“tighten down your abdominals”) while the instructor gradually releases their effort so that the movement arm is kept stationary in the contracted position.  Importantly the instructor should always be in control and provide direction to the client in these types of transfers.  The instructor will assist the movement arm (and client) into the contracted position and there should be an indicating cue, something to the effect of “that…iiiisss…yours” as the weight is transferred.
Execution, Instruction, and Turnarounds:
ECCENTRIC: Once the movement arm is transferred, instruct the client to “slowly begin to uncurl their spine from the bottom up as they begin to lower the weight”.
As the client is lowering the weight, the instructor should provide the necessary instruction as to when to change directions.  This will happen when the weights touch in the lower turnaround.  So prior to reaching this point, instruct the client to “uncurl far enough to allow the weights to barely touch before changing directions and curling back down.”  Remember, there is always a cue to give on the first eccentric of any exercise.
LOWER TURNAROUND: Once the subject reaches the lower turnaround (i.e. weights touch), they will “immediately” or “continuously” or “seamlessly” change directions.  (Importantly, ‘immediate’ means right away, but does not mean suddenly in this case).
CONCENTRIC:  After a continuous change of direction, the client will “begin to curl back down one vertebrae at a time from the top down toward their lap (or hip crease)” or “begin to draw their rib cage down to their pelvis”.  As the client makes their way through the concentric portion of the first rep, it is helpful to describe the anatomical action that is expected.  Something along the lines of “tighten your abdominals and round your back…”
UPPER TURNAROUND: The upper turnaround will be when the subject has fully contracted their abdomen.  Not necessarily when the movement arm reaches the top of their legs.  It is important to teach clients that it is not always the goal to move the movement arm through its fullest excursion possible.  Instead the movement should cease when the targeted musculature is fully contracted, which may come before the machine’s movement arm has been moved to its furthest point possible.
At the instant the subject reaches the end stop there should be a brief pause in the contracted position (and a 2 to 3 second “squeeze” from the third rep on).  This is unlike our compound pushing movements (LP, CP, OH, SD) where the upper turnaround is met with continuous change of direction into the eccentric phase.  This brief pause and slightly longer squeeze require an additional level of focus and control, making the movement safer.  They also afford the subject an opportunity to “feel” the target muscles.
Verbiage on a squeeze might be “keep rounding, keep breathing, [click], ease out” or “tighten down hard, trying to cramp your abdominals, [click], ease out.” Keep in mind we need to teach the client HOW to squeeze.  Saying “squeeze” alone is not a useful instruction.  The MSF Exercise Practitioner is constantly teaching!
NOTES
It is our company policy that we ascertain any and all limitations and/or contraindications to resistance training for all of our clients and determine which movement patterns these may affect.  This is one of the primary purposes of having the prospective client complete the consultation paperwork.  It is also a primary purpose of the consultation itself, to understand the limitations of each individual and to tailor the workouts accordingly.  There will be certain subjects that do not tolerate lumbar flexion from an orthopedic standpoint.  For these individuals it may make sense to omit the abdominal (trunk flexion) movement pattern altogether until they have medical clearance or a better understanding of the diagnosis if they do not already have one.
While avoiding the movement pattern altogether would be the most conservative approach overall, we may be able to actually help the client by strengthening the area.  For those with no underlying orthopedic issue, the most conservative approach would be to perform a Timed Static Contraction (TSC).  In this situation, the instructor would pin a heavy enough weight so that the movement arm cannot be moved (i.e. too heavy to actually lift).  Then, with the client properly secured in the seat, the instructor will position the movement arm to some approximate midpoint in the range of motion, maybe slightly biased toward the upper turnaround (i.e. contracted position).  The instructor would then lead the client through an increasing STATIC effort against the roller pad.  This is typically a 50% effort for 30 seconds, a 75% effort for another 30 seconds, and a final 30 seconds at an all out effort, for a total of 90 seconds of continuous effort.  This approach when followed at least weekly for months at a time can build an appreciable level of strength contributing to improved function of the involved muscles.  There also tends to be a carryover effect to what has been estimated at 15 degrees in either direction of the position of the static exercise.  There is also a possibility that the client will be able to one day perform the abdominal exercise dynamically and continue to progress.
If the TSC arrangement discussed above is not possible, there may be a good chance that the subject can tolerate the Torso Rotation exercise.  By performing this exercise, there will be a benefit to the abdominal muscles while avoiding the discomfort of the trunk flexion movement pattern.
The resistance profile on the abdominal machine makes it heavier at the lower turnaround and lighter in the contracted position.  This makes sense as we are biomechanically weaker in the contracted position.  Because of this however, the contracted position can become a point of respite for subjects that are relying on their instincts and looking for relief.  In this case, it may be useful to place a selector pin into one of the upper holes of the stack pin (above the weight stack).  This will create an end stop and essentially truncate the most contracted of this exercise.  If this strategy is employed it should be done in a way that is tested and experienced by the instructor to understand how the movement is affected and it needs to be properly documented on the client’s chart.