Adduction - MSF Comprehensive Overview
Target Muscles:
Adductor Brevis (Inner Thigh) - Hip horizontal Adduction
Adductor Longus (Inner Thigh) - Hip horizontal Adduction
Adductor Magnus (Inner Thigh) - Hip horizontal Adduction
Pectineus (Inner Thigh) - Hip horizontal Adduction
Gracilis (Inner Thigh) - Hip horizontal Adduction
Considerations for setup:
The ADduction machine has a relatively simple set up, but extra care must be taken by the instructor as there is assistance required for the client’s entry/exit on this exercise.
Similar to ABduction, the seat back will be standardized at a position 6 or 7.
The first (and really only) consideration is establishing a conservative range of motion for the starting position and lower turnaround.  This will be accomplished by the use of a gap, which will be customized to a tolerable level of stretch for every client on this machine.
To set the gap the instructor will clear the main weight stack (and accessory stack if not required) and establish control of the movement arms with their leg and hands.  Keep hold of the main stack selector pin.
Ensure the movement arms are far enough apart and then have the client take a seat.
Begin to bring the movement arms together and instruct the client to lift their left leg up and into the left movement arm as you continue to slowly bring them together.  Then when the movement arms are close enough, have the client lift their right leg into place, pushing the movement arms closer together to further assist if necessary.  There is a timing and finesse to this process and the instructor should take a proactive approach in accommodating the client.
Once seated with legs in place, the instructor will carefully allow the movement arms to drift apart keeping their leg/hand against the mechanism to prevent sudden or excessive movement.
Ask the client to indicate when they begin to feel a slight stretch on the inner thigh.  The instructor may need to gently assist the movement arms apart the further apart they move.  Once the gentle stretch has been reached, the instructor should place the selector pin into the desired weight and note the gap.  Then confirm whether the client feels comfortable and determine whether an adjustment is needed before beginning.  The client may actually request more of a stretch at which time the instructor should use their careful judgement to determine whether it is necessary or beneficial.
Posture/Get Set:
Sit back, butt back, chin slightly tucked (neutral), feet and ankles relaxed, hands on handles for balance but not anchoring down.
Ideally this exercise will be performed with a relaxed upper body, but a contracted abdomen can be instructed.
Execution, Instruction, and Turnarounds:
LOAD UP:  From the starting position (lower turn), neutral head position, hands on handles, establish breathing, and gradually begin to apply pressure by driving the knees together.
Once the instructor has given the cue to begin the load up, there should be a quiet moment where the instructor is intently observing the actions.  If done properly, a simple “good” or “mmm, hmm” is an opportunity for positive feedback.
CONCENTRIC/UPPER TURN:  Subject will move through this first concentric phase, smoothly driving their knees together (upper turn).  Once the desired duration is achieved in the contracted position (either brief pause of 1 second or slightly longer squeeze of 2 to 3 seconds), the instructor will then click at that exact moment.
ECCENTRIC:  The click is immediately followed with the instruction to “ease out,  do not speed up” or something to that effect.
The instructor then needs to establish the expectation for the first lower turnaround of the set, which on an Adduction will be to “touch and go” or “be continuous” or “seamlessly change directions as the weights touch”.  Remember, there is always a cue to give on the first eccentric of an exercise.
LOWER TURN:  Touch and go at the lower turn as if “passing through without pausing.”
One continuous pace with only a “brief but definite” pause of about one second in the contracted position of the first two reps and a squeeze of two to three seconds from the third rep on.  Keep in mind, we cannot simply rely on the cue of ‘squeeze’ in this situation.  That can mean various things to different people.  We need to teach them HOW to squeeze.
Verbiage for the pause/squeeze in the contracted position might be “continue to drive your knees together…keep breathing, lock it in place, [click], ease out…keep that pace.”  So during the desired duration of the squeeze in the contracted position, we are providing actionable instruction.
Importantly, the number of reps recorded will only be those that the instructor deems were full reps.  So if the client does not reach full contraction of the upper back, that is not a full rep and will not be recorded in the rep count on the chart.  But due to the nature of certain exercises, and Adduction being one of them, it may make sense to continue the set despite the client no longer achieving full range of motion.  There will still be stimulative tension experienced on the partial reps as long as they are within the client’s exacting control.
The decision to continue a set after reaching concentric failure is highly individual and should be discussed with a studio Leader or with MSF Corporate.  For a brand new client, just completing a handful of full range of motion reps may be enough to introduce the exercise.  So in other words, we may not even take them to concentric failure if they are new to strength training or if they are showing signs of adverse discomfort or losing proper form.  This is a progressive journey.
While we are encouraging the subject to maintain their pace, they should expect to have to increase their effort over the course of a set.  Effort does not remain constant.  In order to maintain a given pace with increasing fatigue, effort needs to voluntarily increase as a counter to the fatigue.  This is how stimulative mechanical tension is created.
NOTES
Be attentive to any potential problems while loading/unloading clients on this machine.  The instructor is responsible for the client’s safety at all times.  As such, the instructor should entirely control the movement arms and be direct with their instruction during the loading and unloading process.
With safety being our primary objective and concern, care must be taken to not create dangerous or vulnerable positions on exercises.  When introducing the Adduction machine, a conservative stretch should be established.  However, with continued practice and strengthening, we may determine that a slightly longer ROM (i.e. more stretch) is warranted.  This is NOT an attribute we seek necessarily but depending on how conservative we started with a particular client, we may increase the stretch SLIGHTLY over time.  While there is value in loading in the stretched position, there are diminishing returns and potential risk if it becomes excessive.  As always, these types of decisions that lead to a less conservative setting should be discussed with the Studio Leader and/or MSF Corporate.
While we are encouraging driving out through the knees, the knees may not in fact be in contact with the thigh pads.  This is acceptable though in that to instruct driving out through the femur may be confusing and may not be as simply understood as through the singular point of the knee.  The knee is essentially the end of the femur, which is the lever we are moving with our hip musculature on this exercise.
Many subjects will come to us with hip issues (i.e. replacements) and may or may not be able to tolerate this movement pattern.  While avoiding this exercise altogether would be the most conservative approach overall, we may be able to actually help the client by strengthening the area.  For those with no underlying orthopedic issue, the most conservative approach would be to perform a Timed Static Contraction (TSC).  In this situation, the instructor would pin a heavy enough weight so that the movement arm cannot be moved (i.e. too heavy to actually lift).  Then, with the client properly secured in the seat, the instructor will position the movement arm to some approximate midpoint in the range of motion, maybe slightly biased toward the upper turnaround.  The instructor would then lead the client through an increasing STATIC effort against out into the thigh pads.  This is typically a 50% effort for 30 seconds, a 75% effort for another 30 seconds, and a final 30 seconds at an all out effort, for a total of 90 seconds of continuous effort.  This approach when followed at least weekly for months at a time can build an appreciable level of strength contributing to improved function of the hips.  There also tends to be a carryover effect to what has been estimated at 15 degrees in either direction of the position of the static exercise.  There is also a possibility that the client will be able to one day perform this exercise dynamically and continue to progress.
Importantly, while learning the Continuous Tension protocol, the subject will most likely be using a relatively light weight and as a result will probably be capable of performing a higher number of reps, spending more time on the machine.  While this may seem conducive to learning, it can also be counterproductive from a discomfort standpoint.  Yes, a big part of the learning curve is to be able to produce an effort while managing discomfort, but there can be diminishing returns in that the movement becomes intolerable before it is stimulative.  Ideally we should be striving for perfect form with “faster” reps (i.e. 6 second positive, 6 second negative) and a “heavier” weight that leads to failure in 10 or fewer reps.  While this may not be achievable or advisable in the initial sessions, as long as the subject is demonstrating a clear understanding of the control required, we may progress the intensity more quickly.