Cervical Extension - MSF Comprehensive Overview
Target Muscles:
Trapezius (Upper Back/Neck Extensors) - Cervical Extension
Semispinalis Muscle Group (Neck Extensors) - Cervical Extension
Splenius Capitis (Neck Extensors) - Cervical Extension
Longissimus Muscle Group (Neck Extensors) - Cervical Extension
Synergists:
Erector Spinae (Spinal Erectors/Spinal Extensors) - Spinal Extension/Anterior Pelvic Tilt
Multifidus - Spinal Extension/Spinal stability
Quadratus Lumborum (QL’s) - Spinal Extension/Anterior Pelvic Tilt
Considerations for setup:
There are several considerations when establishing the settings for a client on the Cervical Extension, along with the need to satisfy the Theoretical versus Practical alignment.
The most sensible place to start will be the seat height.  Determine the seat height by first taking into account the height of the subject.  Taller subjects will most likely have a lower seat, shorter subjects will have a higher seat.
As a rotary movement, the Cervical Extension has a single axis of rotation and in theory, this axis is to be aligned with the axis of rotation of the body, near the middle of the neck.  This will most likely be somewhere around C3 to C5.
This will approximate the alignment of the axis of rotation on the vertical plane.  There must also be an alignment horizontally and this will be accomplished by having the subject sit more forward or more rearward on the seat.  The instructor must pull the movement arm (head pad) back to create the space for the subject to sit down.  Most subjects will likely be sitting somewhere in the middle of the seat.  If they were to sit all the way back on the seat, which will probably be their instinctive assumption, they will most likely be positioned entirely behind the axis.
After determining the seat height and position on the seat, the theoretical alignment will be established.  At this point the seat back can be brought forward to make light contact with the subject’s mid back.  Note, the back pad should NOT push the subject more forward and thus out of alignment.
The next consideration is the most important and is what is referred to as the practical alignment.  Having already aligned the subject with the axis from the theoretical standpoint, there needs to be an assurance that those settings allow for the movement arm (head pad) to fit securely on the back of the head.  This will ultimately govern the final settings on the Cervical Extension.
Again, the instructor will manually control the movement arm and pull the head pad back to allow the subject to sit.  Having the subject sit as upright as possible and placing the hands on the handles in front of them, carefully bring the movement arm forward so that the head pad meets the back of the head.
It is critical to get this alignment correct.  The back of the head needs to perfectly seat into the opening of the head pad.  The most secure and most comfortable placement will likely have the most protruding portion of the back of the head in the open recess of the head pad.
If the seat is too low, the back of the head will be at the bottom of the head pad and the head pad will likely begin to slide up and over the top of the head (or it will feel as though the pad will slide up on the subject’s head).
If the seat is too high, the back of the head will be above the opening on the head pad.
Even if there appears to be a perfect alignment while seated in the neutral position at the point of the movement arm transfer, once the subject begins to perform the exercise, there may be some sliding or movement of the head on the pad.  This should not happen.  In this case, it may make sense to have the subject either move slightly forward or slightly rearward on the seat.  This will only be done while NOT under load.  Any adjustment to position should be directed by the instructor and the movement arm should be entirely under the instructor’s control.
There will be no gap on this machine as the lower turnaround will either be the full excursion of the movement arm or as much of a stretch (flexion) as feels comfortable to the subject.
Most clients will start with 20 pounds, the lightest increment available on this exercise.  In the event that a client is injured or severely deconditioned, it may be advised to perform this exercise in a static fashion.  See Notes section below for more detail.
Posture/Get Set:
The Cervical Extension requires an interpersonal transfer of weight (i.e. handoff) and the instructor must become skilled enough through practice to perform this properly.  In order for the client to sit, the movement arm must be pulled back and controlled by the instructor.
Chest up, feet flat on floor (or platform or heels on platform depending on height and leg length), hands on handles with elbows in, chin slightly elevated to receive movement arm.
Client must be sitting upright with an exaggerated posture.  Maintaining a proper, extended lower back throughout the exercise is critical.  Although some thoracic movement may be necessary during the dynamic execution.  See more in the Execution section below.
With the movement arm secured by the instructor, clear direction needs to be given to get the client properly positioned and aligned with the movement arm.  The client should be holding a firm, upright position as the instructor brings the movement arm closer to the back of the client’s head.
The instructor will then allow the head pads to make contact with the back of the head while cueing any necessary adjustments to better align the client.  Usually commands such as, “sit taller…chin up/down…scoot forward” will be effective in ensuring a secure seating of the head to the head pads.  Client will be in a relatively neutral head position as this will be the safest and strongest point to receive the load.  Importantly, the instructor should stand to the side of the client to better assess this alignment.
The trainer will then gradually begin to transfer the weight to the client while giving the verbal indicator “that is yours,” or something to that effect.  The client needs to hold the movement arm still to establish control before beginning the eccentric.  If there is movement during the handoff the trainer should not yet fully transfer the load.  Instruct the client to “increase your force” or “push harder” or “don’t move”.
Execution, Instruction, and Turnarounds:
After a proper handoff, the instructor will cue the client to “slowly begin to allow the head to come forward…trying to maintain consistent contact with the head pad”.  The first movement is the eccentric phase into neck flexion.  Remember there is always a cue to give on the first eccentric of every exercise.
This next suggestion is critical to the movement.  In some cases, in order to maintain a consistent, flush contact point with the back of the head against the head pad, the torso will have to move.  More specifically, the ribcage may need to drop slightly as the head moves forward and then rise as the head moves back into cervical extension.  The degree of movement of the ribcage will be entirely dictated by the requirement to maintain flush contact with the head pad.  While this may not be ideal in theory, it may be necessary to keep the movement smooth and continuous, ultimately making it safer.
While still in the first eccentric, and possibly allowing the ribcage to drop to accommodate the contact with the head pad, the instructor will cue the client to “allow the head to come forward as far as [you] feel comfortable.  In the event that [you] are able to allow the weights to touch, do so with a continuous/seamless change of direction.”
Another helpful cue to maintain a smooth execution is to “always attempt to push squarely into the head pad” or “keep your head in the path of the machine, don’t try and create your own path.”
Once they have changed direction, the instructor will want to remind the client to “keep lifting your head/chin while you lift your chest and arch your back.”  The client will most likely not know how far back to go so something like “follow it all the way, back and down” or “head to butt, butt to head” can be helpful in encouraging the full extension pattern we are seeking with this movement.
The upper turnaround (and squeeze) will occur when the subject has extended their cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine to the fullest extent possible.  This will vary between individuals and the instructor should note the exact range of motion for every client.
The trainer will click only after they have visually confirmed that the desirable range of motion has been achieved and the movement has temporarily ceased (i.e. no further contraction of the extensors is possible).  The instructor needs to be attentive to the likelihood that the client will assume that the movement should continue until they hear the click.  But the opposite is true.  The click will ONLY come when the proper range of motion has been achieved and the client has established full control with a brief pause in contracted position.
Verbiage used on the concentric might be to “try and draw a rainbow/arch with the top of your head from front to back.”
But of paramount importance is the fact that the Cervical Extension should NEVER be taken to failure.  There is a greater likelihood that the subject will change their behavior/execution as a result of the increasing perceived exertion.  Stay within the tolerable limit of each individual client, making sure that every rep is able to be completed with exacting control.  Always take a conservative approach and perform fewer reps than they appear capable of.  In other words, stop the set early especially during the first few times on the machine.  Over time we will get a better understanding of their capability and the client will become stronger and use better control.  Then and only then can we begin to progress to a more intense approach.  But again, NEVER take the set to failure.
NOTES
While we at MSF have gone out of our way to ensure that the client’s safety remains our number one priority, we still must acknowledge that certain exercises pose more of a potential risk than others.  Cervical Extension would most likely be one of those exercises.  There is more risk for the obvious reason that the cervical spine is having to control an external load.  Even if someone has never strength trained before, they will likely experience many physical endeavors throughout the course of a normal day as they carry groceries or walk up stairs or perform yard work.  While the neck muscles are required to work all day long as they are tasked with holding up our heads, an additional, external load is an uncommon situation.
A common discrepancy on this exercise usually involves the subject not understanding the path that the head and neck must travel through to perform this movement correctly.  They will often push or resist against the head pad in a linear path.  But being that this movement is a single joint exercise and therefore rotary in nature, the instructor must teach and remind the client that the head should move about the axis of the neck beneath it.  As mentioned above, the image of drawing an arch or a rainbow with the top of the head from front to back can be helpful.  Or to remind the client that they will be constantly either lifting or lowering their nose/chin as they execute the movement.  Another common discrepancy is for the client to simply rotate up and down in place, causing the head to slide against the head pad.  So there is zero travel of the movement arm in this case even though they are moving their head.  Again, they must be reminded to bring their entire head forward and down, tucking the chin, on the eccentric, and then pushing back and down, lifting their chin and arching their back on the concentric.
This exercise may also be performed isometrically for safety or education purposes (Static Hold or Timed Static Contraction).  Just like any static hold, the instructor will load the client and take the weight away at the end.  There is no movement with a static exercise.  On the cervical extension specifically, the best position to perform the static tends to be just beyond neutral.  So biased toward the concentric where the subject will have their chin slightly elevated.  They must be reminded to push back AND down to maintain that position.  Remember that while there is no movement on a static, they must still direct their effort in a direction.  As discussed above, the natural inclination is to want to push straight back, when in fact it should be simultaneously back and down.
It should go without saying that due to the awkward nature of the movement and the unfamiliarity of an external load against the head, that the cervical extension should NEVER be taken to failure and should be progressed slowly.  A conservative approach should be taken with the number of reps performed too, even with what is deemed a lighter weight.  Anything over 8 reps might be considered excessive unless it was a seasoned trainee with a lot of experience on this exercise.
As with any interpersonal transfer (hand off) of a movement arm, it needs to be rehearsed and perfected by the instructor.  The instructor needs to control the entire process with clear, concise cueing and manage the movement arm entirely until there is one hundred percent certainty that the subject has control of the load and is properly positioned.