Compound Row - MSF Comprehensive Overview
Target Muscles:
Rhomboids (Upper Back) - Scapular Retraction/Adduction and downward Rotation
Trapezius (Upper Back) - Scapular Retraction/Adduction and downward Rotation
Latissimus Dorsi (Lats) - Shoulder Extension, Shoulder Adduction
Posterior Deltoid (Rear Delt) - Shoulder horizontal Abduction, Shoulder Extension
Teres Major (Upper Back) - Shoulder Extension
Biceps - Elbow Flexion, Forearm Supination
Brachioradialis - Elbow Flexion, Forearm Pronation, Supination
Synergists:
Erector Spinae (Spinal Erectors) - stabilizers - Spinal Extension/Anterior Pelvic Tilt (chest up posture)
Wrist Flexors (Forearms) - Wrist Flexion (gripping/holding)
Considerations for setup:
Determine height of the chest pad as either the up or down position.  This will usually be correlated to the height of the client.  See NOTES below for further discussion.
Look to position the chest pad so that the handles are just within the subject’s finger tip reach with a fully extended arm.  There is a standard gap of 2 on the weight stack to which we are basing the seat setting.
Ensure the movement arm mechanism will clear the top of the head of the subject.  If not, or if it is close it may be advisable to move the chest pad further back, which will likely require a larger gap of the weight stack.
The default setting for the width of the handles is the middle position (noted on the chart with an ‘M’).  If someone had a smaller frame or we were seeking to bias the lats we might use the narrow setting (‘N’ on the chart).  And if our goal was to bias more of the upper back, or the client had a larger/wider build, we might use the wide setting and note that on the chart with ‘W’.  In any case, we need to be consistent with the handle setting in that particular workout of the rotation.  Each handle will have its own settings that correspond to the resulting limb length and will have its own targeted musculature.  Random variation or lack of consistency may negatively impact the workout at worst or at the very least create a misleading metric on the chart.
Posture/Get Set:
Chest up, hips back, chin slightly tucked (neutral) with slight lean forward into the chest pad.  If the subject sits too close to the chest pad and the hips are either against or tucked under the chest pad, there will be a temptation to lean away from the chest pad.  This can increase the contribution from the low back which is not desirable on this movement.
The client and the trainer will pull the handles back together to a position just beyond the midpoint but not to the fully contracted position.  The client will not likely be able to hold this position when handed off.
The loads tend to be heavier on this exercise and the leverage is poor for the assisting instructor, so the client has to be able to reach the handles and contribute.
It is also advisable for the instructor to establish a wide base with their stance so they can better leverage their bodyweight in the assist rather than just the arms.  Additionally, since the client will most likely be using the neutral handles, the instructor should grab the bottom of the movement arm with one hand and the pronated handle with the other hand.
The trainer will then gradually transfer the weight to the client (i.e. handoff) while giving the verbal indicator “that is yours,” or something to that effect.  The client needs to hold the movement arm still to establish control before beginning the eccentric.  If there is movement during the handoff the trainer should not yet fully transfer the load.  Instruct the client to “increase your force” or “pull harder.”
Execution, Instruction, and Turnarounds:
The movement requires an instructor assist as the set will start near the contracted position (upper turn).  The scapular retraction component of the row is paramount to the movement pattern so the transfer and brief hold while contracting will remind them of the feeling we are seeking.  After an accurate handoff, the instructor will cue the client to “slowly begin to let the arms straighten,” or to “begin lowering the movement arm.”  Remember there is always a cue to give on the first eccentric of an exercise.
Once the subject’s arms straighten, they will “continuously” or “seamlessly” or “immediately” begin bending them again.  (Importantly, ‘immediate’ means right away, but does not mean suddenly in this case).  This is the lower turnaround on a compound row and in most cases the weights will NOT touch here.  But it may also help to have the weights touch just as the arms straighten for clients who may be inconsistent with their range of motion or to protect a valgus elbow.
The upper turnaround (squeeze) will be when the subject has fully contracted their upper back where the elbows travel beyond the torso or the upper arm aligns with the side of the torso in the event of a more lat biased row.
Most subjects will assume that they should pull the handles back as far as they can, lifting the weights higher.  The instructor should remind them of the real objective to focus on the optimal range of motion for the muscles being targeted.
The trainer will click only after they have visually confirmed that the desirable range of motion has been achieved and the movement has temporarily ceased (i.e. no further contraction is possible).  The instructor needs to be attentive to the likelihood that the client will assume that the movement should continue until they hear the click.  But the opposite is true.  The click will ONLY come when the proper range of motion has been achieved and the client has established control (brief pause in a chest up scapular retraction).  So these two objectives are at odds and the instructor needs to anticipate and be assertive to control the outcome.  This will be yet another example of how the trainer cares more about the workout than the client does.
Verbiage used on the concentric might be to “draw the shoulders back (or together) as hard as possible” or to “pull with the shoulder blades.”  For a lat biased row, the instruction might be to “keep your chest up and pull the elbows into the sides of the torso.”
Maintain posture, head position, pace, and arm path.  Elbows should track through the same path concentrically and eccentrically, whether wide or narrow to ensure consistent loading of target musculature.
INTENSITY: By definition, the set will end when concentric failure is reached (i.e. subject can no longer lift the weight with perfect form).  This is where we would note the reps and record only the full reps achieved on the chart.  But as discussed throughout the Academy, certain exercises lend themselves to performing additional, partial repetitions and the Compound Row is one of these movements.  Especially when the client is able to perform those partial reps beyond the midpoint and with perfect form.  Of even more importance for the consideration of training beyond concentric failure (i.e. using partial repetitions) would be the experience and tolerance level of the individual.  A newer, more deconditioned client would not yet be ready for this more advanced technique.  They can simply perform full repetitions to a point where they begin to fatigue and the effort will probably be enough to provide the desired stimulus.  Of course we are always attempting to progress every client’s understanding of effort and intensity while improving their quality from session to session as is illustrated in the point below.
While we are encouraging the subject to maintain their pace, they should expect to have to increase their effort over the course of a set.  Effort does not remain constant.  In order to maintain a given pace with increasing fatigue, effort needs to voluntarily increase as a counter to the fatigue.  This is how stimulative mechanical tension is created.
NOTES
Ensure that the mechanism at the top of the movement arms is far enough away from the top of the clients’ head while entering, exiting, and training.
The neutral handle option will likely be the most shoulder friendly position and will target a more overall area including both lats and upper back.  As a result this is our default hand position.
The handles should just be within fingertip reach while unloaded so that the client can assist the trainer (and vice versa) into the contracted position during the load up.  And then the client can set the weight down without assistance to unload at the end of the set.
In general, a narrower arm path (elbows in) will result in a more lat biased movement while an abducted arm path (elbows out) will bias the upper back musculature.  Keep in mind that the more we seek to target the upper back muscles (rhomboids, traps) the more scapular protraction and retraction we should encourage.
There will be some clients that have a valgus elbow characterized by an abnormal outward angle of the forearm relative to the humerus.  In more severe cases, movement at the elbow (often on the eccentric) will result in varying degrees of discomfort.  A shortened range of motion that limits elbow extension may be beneficial or performing a pushing movement first can help.  If either of those strategies do not alleviate the issue, it may be beneficial to try the pronated handles.
Keep in mind with a pronated grip, the upper arm path will need to be wider and the elbows should travel well past the midline of torso in the contracted position.  This may be used to emphasize the upper back muscles and will create another variation on the row that can be added for a more advanced client.
Height of the chest pad will most likely be dictated by the height, or length of spine, of the client.  Some exceptions may include raising the chest pad to the uppermost position to account for a larger abdomen, or lowering the chest pad if the client is experiencing discomfort from the pressure against the sternum.
Importantly, while learning the Continuous Tension protocol, the subject will most likely be using a relatively light weight and as a result will probably be capable of performing a higher number of reps, spending more time on the machine.  While this may seem conducive to learning, it can also be counterproductive from a discomfort standpoint.  Yes a big part of the learning curve is to be able to produce an effort while managing discomfort, but there can be diminishing returns in that the movement becomes intolerable before it is stimulative.  Ideally we should be striving for perfect form with “faster” reps (i.e. 6 second positive, 6 second negative) and a “heavier” weight that leads to failure in 10 or fewer reps.  While this may not be achievable or advisable in the initial sessions, as long as the subject is demonstrating a clear understanding of the control required, we may progress the intensity more quickly.