Leg Extension - MSF Comprehensive Overview
Target Muscles:
Quadriceps (Thighs) - Knee Extension - all four heads of the quadriceps are active and most notably the Rectus Femoris, which is not stimulated from a pressing pattern
Synergists:
Brachioradialis (Forearms) - anchoring into seat with arms
Wrist Flexors (Forearms) - gripping/holding - anchoring into seat with arms
Considerations for setup:
LE will most likely have a gap of 2 as an introduction to this exercise.
Move the seat back to the rearmost position leaving the largest possible area on the seat.
With the movement arm (tibia pad) in the bottom position, have the subject sit with their legs hanging off the front of the seat at the knee.  In this position, the knee joint should be approximately aligned with the axis of rotation of the machine.
Have the subject remain seated but lean forward slightly.  Then carefully bring the back pad forward to just make contact with the subject’s pelvis (note: the seat back should not push them further forward as the knees will then go forward of the axis of rotation).  Have the subject sit all the way back in the seat and verify that the knees are still in alignment with the axis of rotation.  Also consider whether the knees are too close to the edge of the seat as this can create pressure behind the knees.
Once the seat setting is determined, have the subject exit and stand so that the weight can be selected and they may be properly loaded into the machine.
Due to the significant knee flexion in the starting position of the LE, there will most likely be a standard gap of 2.  This may vary slightly between machines and should be discussed with the MSF Corporate team during installation.
Set the appropriate weight, again with a standardized gap of 2 or as otherwise determined for that particular LE machine.  Then, using the assist bar attached to the movement arm, push the tibia pad out of the way and have the subject sit, rear end first, so that they may then sweep their legs in from the side, behind the tibia pad.  Carefully lower the tibia pad down into the starting position ensuring the pad is making contact with the subject’s shin just above the top of the foot.
ALTERNATIVE LOADING METHOD: In the event that the weight being used is too heavy to be moved with the assist bar, just set the desired weight only on the accessory stack and move the tibia pad out of the way.  With this technique, the trainer will only be lifting the 20 pounds on the main stack and whatever weight is needed for the working set on the accessory stack.  Client will sit and the trainer will then lower the movement arm ensuring contact with the subject’s shins just above the foot.  Note that because of the lack of weight acting on the movement arm the trainer may have to force the mechanism back against the passive tension of the subject’s dangling legs.  Then tactfully reach across the client’s body to select the proper main stack weight and gap.
Securely fasten the seat belt in the subject’s hip crease, ensuring it is not pulling down on the femurs.  The instructor may have to request that the subject hand them the other side of the seat belt.
Posture/Get Set:
Chest up - lay back against the angle of the seat with the head upright in a neutral position looking forward.  Hands on handles pulling up for leverage.  Face and jaw relaxed, breathing freely.  Feet and ankles relaxed (throughout the set).
Execution, Instruction, and Turnarounds:
From the starting position (lower turn), keeping neutral head position, feet and ankles relaxed, pulling up on the handles, establish breathing and gradually apply pressure into the movement arm (tibia pad) as the client begins to straighten the knees.
Once the instructor has given the cue to begin the load up, there should be a quiet moment where the instructor is intently observing the actions.  If done properly, a simple “perfect” or “yes, just like that” is an opportunity for positive feedback.
Subject will move through this first concentric phase until the knees are fully straightened, with the “click” after the brief pause or squeeze (or wherever strength, effort, and individual range of motion permit movement).
After the load up and first concentric, and immediately after the click, the instructor may cue “ease out and do not speed up.”
The instructor then needs to establish the expectation for the first lower turnaround of the set, which on a leg extension will be to “touch and go” or “be continuous” or “barely touch, barely start”.  Remember, there is always a cue to give on the first eccentric of an exercise.
Touch and go at the lower turn as if “seamlessly passing through the bottom.”
Keep hips down by anchoring with the hands.
One continuous pace with only a “brief but definite” pause of about one second in the contracted position of the first two reps and a squeeze of two to three seconds from the third rep on.  Keep in mind, we cannot simply rely on the cue of ‘squeeze’ in this situation.  That can mean various things to different people.  We need to teach them HOW to squeeze.
Verbiage for the pause/squeeze in the contracted position might be “pulling up on the handles, fully straighten your knees, keep breathing, keep still, [click], ease out, don’t speed up” or “keeping your head still, attempt to over-straighten your knees, there, lock it in place, [click], ease out.”  So during the desired duration of the squeeze in the contracted position, we are providing useful direction.
Maintain posture, head position, pace, and knee alignment throughout.  The only movement on this exercise is at the knee joint and maybe the arms resulting from an increased need for leverage from the handles.  Everything else is held still.
Importantly, the number of reps recorded will only be those that the instructor deems were full reps.  So if the client does not reach full extension of the knee, that is not a full rep and will not be recorded in the rep count on the chart.  But due to the nature of certain exercises, and leg extension being one of them, it may make sense to continue the set despite the client no longer achieving full range of motion.  There will still be stimulative tension experienced on the partial reps as long as they are within the client’s exacting control.
The decision to continue a set after reaching concentric failure is highly individual and should be discussed with a studio Leader or with MSF Corporate.  For a brand new client, just completing a handful of full range of motion reps may be enough to introduce the exercise.  So in other words, we may not even take them to concentric failure if they are new to strength training or if they are showing signs of adverse discomfort or losing proper form.  This is a progressive journey.
And while we are encouraging the subject to maintain their pace, they should expect to have to increase their effort over the course of a set.  Effort does not remain constant.  In order to maintain a given pace with increasing fatigue, effort needs to voluntarily increase as a counter to the fatigue.  This is how stimulative mechanical tension is created.
NOTES
It may be necessary or beneficial to describe “gradual” to the subject (e.g. 20 pounds of pressure, 40 pounds, 60 pounds, eventually reaching enough force to begin moving).  Or have client imagine that there was 100 pounds on weight stack and they are to gradually find 101 pounds of pressure, or just enough to crack the weight stack.  Also remind them that this gradual load up may take 3 to 5 seconds before movement actually occurs.  We might give imagery of just barely beginning to dent the shin pads and increasing pressure from there.
We give the instruction to relax the feet and ankles throughout the set as there will inevitably be an instinct to want to dorsiflex.  While not dangerous or inherently wrong, it is less than optimal in that it causes the calf to lengthen, which inhibits a full contraction of the quadriceps.  The tightness in the stretched calf makes it harder to straighten the knee.
As discussed above, it is imperative that the MSF Exercise Practitioner become keenly aware of how much intensity to provide each individual client on every exercise in each workout.  As a general rule, the newer, more deconditioned a client is, the less intensity is required to create a stimulus (i.e. positive effect).  So it will be in their best interest to introduce the concept of resistance training more conservatively.  Start lighter and teach them how to control the movement.  They’ll be better able to receive instruction when they’re not overwhelmed by the struggle.  We still absolutely need to teach them intensity and progress their effort and quality but it will be a slower, longer process for these types.  Again, show the client that we care more about their workout than they do!
Some subjects will appear to be unable to fully straighten their knees, regardless of the load.  This may be a result of a true joint limitation, or a lack of effort, or a lack of understanding.  We can illustrate this by having them sit before their set begins, and without any loading, have them demonstrate to what degree they can straighten their knees.  Remember, our clients are not focused on the details.  That is our job and provides the perfect opportunity for our passion to show through.
If this situation arises, it may be a good practice to have them sit and anchor in with their arms (no belt needed here) and have them simply attempt to straighten their knees as much as possible without using the movement arm.  We can encourage them to “straighten further, straighten further” until we are satisfied with their attempt.
If we observe the knee is in fact fully straightening, this becomes a teaching point for what we are seeking during the exercise while under load.  Keep in mind, we may need to lower the weight.
But we may also find out that they are physically incapable of fully straightening one or both knees.  If this is the case, then we need to redefine what is a full range of motion for that client (this should be noted on the chart with “limited ROM” or “limit ext” for purposes of consistency session to session and trainer to trainer).
As an added tool in the toolbox here, we may decide for those subjects that lack full knee extension, to use a hard end stop at THEIR contracted position (upper turn).  This is accomplished by using the extra selector pin and placing it in the main stack pin above the weight stack so that it makes contact with the top of the frame at the subject’s approximate upper turnaround (document the # of empty holes between the top of the weight stack and the location of the selector pin).  This will help create consistency in the range of motion, provide a target for encouraging the subject, and create a termination point for effort to be applied against in the squeeze position.  Over time, we may be able to increase the range of motion (by lowering the pin) as the subject gets stronger.
It is important to note here that given the situation in the points above, the ability to fully straighten the knee is not a requirement to successfully perform this exercise.  It’s not as though the fully contracted position is the only beneficial part of the movement pattern and it may be argued that there is no additive benefit from a hypertrophy standpoint from that full contraction.  It is useful however, not only in establishing a consistency in execution and range of motion, but in allowing the client to “feel” the working muscles.  To assist in creating that mental connection which can contribute to an increase in motor unit recruitment (MUR).  Additionally, it is technically more difficult to lift the weight further and fully contract, which allows for a lighter more conservative weight to be used while still providing all of the challenge we seek.
Many subjects will come to us with knee issues and may or may not be able to tolerate this movement pattern.  While avoiding this exercise altogether would be the most conservative approach overall, we may be able to actually help the client by strengthening the area.  For those with no underlying orthopedic issue, the most conservative approach would be to perform a Timed Static Contraction (TSC).  In this situation, the instructor would pin a heavy enough weight so that the movement arm cannot be moved (i.e. too heavy to actually lift).  Then, with the client properly secured in the seat, the instructor will position the movement arm to some approximate midpoint in the range of motion, maybe slightly biased toward the upper turnaround.  The instructor would then lead the client through an increasing STATIC effort against the back pad.  This is typically a 50% effort for 30 seconds, a 75% effort for another 30 seconds, and a final 30 seconds at an all out effort, for a total of 90 seconds of continuous effort.  This approach when followed at least weekly for months at a time can build an appreciable level of strength contributing to improved function of the knees.  There also tends to be a carryover effect to what has been estimated at 15 degrees in either direction of the position of the static exercise.  There is also a possibility that the client will be able to one day perform this exercise dynamically and continue to progress.
Another option available that is more conservative than dynamic exercise but slightly less conservative than TSC is what we call a Static Hold (SH).  A Static Hold, as the name implies is another variation of a static exercise protocol, so there is no movement.  But it differentiates itself from a TSC in that during a SH the subject is actually holding weight, whereas in a TSC the subject is NOT holding weight but is producing their own force against an immovable movement arm.  For the LE, the trainer can select a conservative but challenging load and set the selector pin in a hole above the weight stack so that when the movement arm is advanced, the selector pin will abut the top of the frame thus prohibiting further positive/concentric movement.  But in order to keep this alternative method safe, the instructor must assist the client (and the movement arm) into the static hold position.  This can be a significant challenge at heavier loads and may not be advisable if the instructor cannot lift the movement arm into place.  The instructor must also assist the movement arm down into the resting position at the completion of the targeted time.  SH’s are typically introduced at a time interval of 30 to 45 seconds maximum to assess tolerance.  With continued use, the client can progress up to a time 120 seconds.  After that, the duration can become excessive and may become more of an act of tolerance rather than a tool used to create tension.  Once a client can sustain an effort for 120 seconds, it may be advisable to increase the load, decrease the time, and begin to progress 10 seconds or so at a time.
Importantly, while learning the Continuous Tension protocol, the subject will most likely be using a relatively light weight and as a result will probably be capable of performing a higher number of reps, spending more time on the machine.  While this may seem conducive to learning, it can also be counterproductive from a discomfort standpoint.  Yes a big part of the learning curve is to be able to produce an effort while managing discomfort, but there can be diminishing returns in that the movement becomes intolerable before it is stimulative.  Ideally we should be striving for perfect form with “faster” reps (i.e. 6 second positive, 6 second negative) and a “heavier” weight that leads to failure in 10 or fewer reps.  While this may not be achievable or advisable in the initial sessions, as long as the subject is demonstrating a clear understanding of the control required, we may progress the intensity more quickly.