Overhead Press - MSF Comprehensive Overview
Target Muscles:
Anterior Deltoid (Shoulder [front]) - Shoulder Abduction, Shoulder Flexion
Middle Deltoid (Shoulder [side]) - Shoulder Abduction, Shoulder Flexion
Triceps - Elbow Extension (straightening of arm)
Pectoralis Major (Chest/Pecs) - assists in Shoulder Flexion
Synergists:
Rectus Abdominis (Abdominals) - Posterior Pelvic Tilt (PPT)
Subscapularis (Rotator Cuff) - Shoulder stabilizer
Posterior Deltoid - Shoulder stabilizer
Trapezius - Scapular rotation and stabilizer (Scapulohumeral Rhythm)
Considerations for setup:
Because the seat is higher off the ground than some of the other machines, most clients will require a stool to support the legs.  Some may need a stool for entry so be attentive to this need and proactively guide them in safely.
There is a standard gap of 2 on the weight stack to which we are basing the seat setting.
Determine height of the seat by having the client sit with arms hanging straight down by their sides.  Then have them bend only at the elbow to raise the hands up and just in front of the torso.  The handles should intersect with and rest in the hand at this position in the lower turnaround.
Subjects with a compromised shoulder joint may benefit from having a lower seat and/or a larger gap of the weight stack.  This will shorten the range of motion in the bottom part of the movement, which may make the exercise more tolerable orthopedically.
Subject will place the hands near the bottom of the handles resulting in a neutral grip.  This tends to be the most joint friendly hand position for most exercises.
Note the angle of the handle in the starting position of the movement.  It is not parallel with the floor or level, but rather angled down.  This would indicate that a forward pressure at a right angle to the handle is required for proper leverage.  This will dictate a slight outward angle of the elbow to better align the forearm with the trajectory of the movement arm.  The movement arm travels out and up in a circular or arcing fashion.
Because of the articulation and path of the movement arm this exercise lends itself to a posterior pelvic tilt (PPT).  Keeping the abdomen contracted will also add stability to the torso creating an element of protection for the lower back while lifting overhead.
The instructor must take into consideration that when the movement is loaded, the resulting compression of the padding and flexing of the movement arms will create more space than was apparent without loading.
Posture/Get Set:
This exercise utilizes a PPT which requires a contracted abdomen that leads to a rounded back posture.  Most subjects will instinctively sit with their chest up and back arched.  Care should be taken to explain the posterior tilt and the benefits it provides through abdominal stimulation and safety.  One should always consider the required posture as an integral component of the exercise itself.
Because of the PPT required, a neutral head position will have the subject gazing downward toward the floor more so than straight ahead.
Hands are placed near the ends of the handles with palms facing (neutral).  Consider hand pads if necessary to blunt the pressure.
The upper arm will approximate the scapular plane, so neither directly in front (sagittal plane) nor out to the side (frontal plane) but rather angled somewhere between 30 to 40 degrees anterior to the frontal plane (scapular plane).  The scapulae should be free to find their own natural position, neither forced into retraction or protraction.
The feet should be in contact with a stool so that the legs are not left to dangle.  Otherwise there will be an inability to properly maintain posture and there will be a loss of output and stability.  Not to mention that many subjects will find this uncomfortable and distracting.  The more someone is given an opportunity to move, shift, or wiggle, the less effective the exercise will be and there is an additional element of risk.
The movement will begin at the lower turnaround.
Execution, Instruction, and Turnarounds:
From the starting position (lower turn), hips back, feet supported, hands near ends of the handles, upper arm aligning to the scapular plane (elbows pointed out 30 to 40 degrees from frontal plane), activating the PPT, chin tucked slightly in neutral head position, establish breathing then gradually apply pressure through the heel of the palms.
Once the instructor has given the cue to begin the load up, there should be a quiet moment where the instructor is intently observing the actions.  If done properly, a simple “perfect” or “yes, just like that” is an opportunity for positive feedback.
Importantly, the initial force to begin the movement will require a slight horizontal component creating a vector perpendicular to the angled handle.  While the exercise is categorized as a ‘vertical push’ it is not purely vertical.
Maintain PPT throughout, neutral head position, and arm path.  Elbows should track through the same path concentrically and eccentrically, to ensure consistent loading of target musculature.
Ideally, the arms should entirely straighten in the upper turnaround allowing for some scapular elevation.  While there should not necessarily be a deliberate shrug in the overhead position, there will be some natural elevation as part of the scapulohumeral rhythm.
The instructor should stay attentive to the range of motion and let the full movement happen in order to properly time the click.  Again as has been a similar theme to a lot of the exercises, there is one and only one moment that makes sense for the click.  The subject should also be aware that the click will come only after the full range of motion has been achieved on each rep (or wherever strength and effort permit movement near the end of a set).
After the load up and first concentric, and immediately after the click, the instructor may cue “ease out and do not speed up.”  Then the instructor needs to establish the expectation for the first lower turnaround of the set, which on a chest press will be to “touch and go” or “be continuous” or “do not pause”.  Remember, there is always a cue to give on the first eccentric of an exercise.
One continuous pace with no perceivable pause at any point until concentric movement stalls.
Maintain posture, head position, pace, and arm path, and throughout.  Elbows should track through the same path concentrically and eccentrically, to ensure consistent loading of target musculature.
And while we are encouraging the subject to maintain their pace, they should expect to have to increase their effort over the course of a set.  Effort does not remain constant.  In order to maintain a given pace with increasing fatigue, effort needs to voluntarily increase as a counter to the fatigue.  This is how stimulative mechanical tension is created.
NOTES
It may be necessary or beneficial to describe “gradual” to the subject (e.g. 20 pounds of pressure, 40 pounds, 60 pounds, eventually reaching enough force to begin moving).  Or have client imagine that there was 100 pounds on weight stack and they are to gradually find 101 pounds of pressure, or just enough to crack the weight stack.  Also remind them that this gradual load up may take 3 to 5 seconds before movement actually occurs.
There is no pause on an overhead press.  It is one continuous effort.  Care should still be given to exaggerate control on the changes of direction (“drag out the turn” or “almost pause but don’t”).  Also make sure the subject reaches the upper turnaround by fully straightening the arms prior to the click that indicates the change of direction.  New instructors tend to click too soon causing confusion on exactly where the change of direction occurs and a truncated movement.
Height of the client and arm length will be a primary driver of the seat setting.  Taller subjects will usually have a lower seat and there may even be a need to increase the gap from the standard setting of two to maintain favorable joint angles.
In the event that the subject experiences shoulder pain/discomfort in the upper half of the movement, then shortening the range of motion somewhere near the midpoint of the concentric can make the exercise more tolerable.  A selector pin can be placed into the stack pin to create a hard end stop so that a consistent range of motion can be used.
Importantly, while learning the Continuous Tension protocol, the subject will most likely be using a relatively light weight and as a result will probably be capable of performing a higher number of reps, spending more time on the machine.  While this may seem conducive to learning, it can also be counterproductive from a discomfort standpoint.  Yes a big part of the learning curve is to be able to produce an effort while managing discomfort, but there can be diminishing returns in that the movement becomes intolerable before it is stimulative.  Ideally we should be striving for perfect form with “faster” reps (i.e. 6 second positive, 6 second negative) and a “heavier” weight that leads to failure in 10 or fewer reps.  While this may not be achievable or advisable in the initial sessions, as long as the subject is demonstrating a clear understanding of the control required, we may progress the intensity more quickly.