Pulldown (Torso Arm) - MSF Comprehensive Overview
Target Muscles:
Latissimus Dorsi (Lats) - Shoulder Extension (Supinated, Sagittal plane)
Teres Major (Upper Back) - Shoulder Extension
Posterior Deltoid (Rear Delt) - Shoulder Extension
Biceps - Elbow Flexion, Forearm Supination
Synergists:
Rhomboids (Upper Back) - Scapular downward rotation
Lower Trapezius (Upper Back) - Scapular depression
Pectoralis Major (Chest/Pecs) - Shoulder Extension
Triceps - Shoulder Extension
Erector Spinae (Spinal Erectors) - Spinal Extension/Anterior Pelvic Tilt (chest up posture)
Rectus Abdominis (Abdominals) - Posterior Pelvic Tilt (PPT) at finish or upper turn of rep
Wrist Flexors (Forearms) - Wrist Flexion (gripping/holding)
Considerations for setup:
Because the seat is higher off the ground than other machines, most clients will require a stool to support the legs.  Some may need a stool for entry so be attentive to this need and proactively guide them in safely.  A lower seat position may be required for those that need assistance or maybe shorter than average.  If this is the case, we should also expect a larger gap to bring the handles further down to meet them.  Try to avoid using the 4 highest/furthest from the floor seat positions (avoid 1-4).
The Pulldown exercise is performed with a supinated grip and the handles set so that they are pointing in toward each other and slightly forward (one notch toward neutral).  The Torso Arm variation will have a neutral grip and the handles pointing forward, parallel to each other (the neutral grip will only be used selectively, see NOTES section below).
Look to position the back pad so that when sitting upright, the vertical path of the handles is out in front of the subject as opposed to directly in line with them (i.e. the subject should be behind the path of the handles by at least the length of the upper arm).  Most will have a back pad setting of 2 or 3, larger subjects may need to sit further back on the seat, so a setting of 1 may be advised.
If the subject is short, lacks mobility, or is severely deconditioned, we will want to lower the seat to make entry/exit a safer process (use seats 5-9).  In this case, we will most likely need to increase the gap on the weight stack thereby lowering the handles to be within the subject’s reach.
With a seat of 5 or lower (i.e. closer to the floor) bring the handles down to just within the subject’s reach and pin the weight stack to establish the position of the lower turnaround.
If the weight stack does in fact touch “too soon” (i.e. excessive bend in the elbow) while the client is lowering the weight, consider a lower seat or decreasing the gap.
The ideal grip will have the hands no wider than shoulder width apart.  Slightly narrower than shoulder width may even be better considering that a narrow arm path is optimal to better leverage the lats (in the sagittal plane).  This will keep the elbows closer to the torso and will help prevent more of a row where the elbows are pulled beyond the torso using the upper back at the expense of the lats.
Posture/Get Set:
Chest up, hips back, chin slightly tucked (neutral), upper back against the top of the seat back, seat belt tightly secured.  Because of the seat belt on this exercise it is not necessary to also have a stool.  However, some clients may either have trouble getting into the seat without one and/or may find that having their legs dangle is uncomfortable or distracting.  As such there should be a stool available either under the seat or off to the side in front of the weight stack.  (NOTE: As with anything we do in our role as a professional Exercise Practitioner, we have to be attentive and proactive to the needs of our clients.  Using a stool to get into a machine is a perfect example.  It should not be up to the client to ask for one, we should anticipate the need and preemptively resolve the issue).
The client and the trainer will pull the handles down together near the contracted position.  The loads tend to be heavier on this exercise so the client has to be able to reach the handles and assist.  Unlike the compound row however, which requires scapular retraction, the pulldown does not, so the transfer can take place in a stronger position for the client.  This tends to be right around eye level.
The trainer will then gradually transfer the weight to the client (i.e. handoff) while giving the verbal indicator “that is yours,” or something to that effect.  The client needs to hold the movement arm still to establish control before beginning the eccentric.  If there is movement during the handoff the trainer should not yet fully transfer the load.  Instruct the client to “increase your force” or “pull harder.”
Execution, Instruction, and Turnarounds:
The movement requires an instructor assist as the set will start near the contracted position, with the handles at about eye level.  After an accurate handoff, the instructor will cue the client to “slowly begin to let the arms straighten,” or “with control, slowly allow the movement arm to rise.”  Remember, there is always a cue to give on the first eccentric of any exercise.
LOWER TURNAROUND: Just before the subject’s arms fully straighten and as the plates touch, the subject will “immediately” or “continuously” or “seamlessly” begin bending them again.  (Importantly, ‘immediate’ means right away, but does not mean suddenly in this case).   But it may also help to have the arms fully straighten just before the weights touch for those subjects that may benefit from a full lengthening/stretch of the torso and arms.
UPPER TURNAROUND: The upper turnaround will be when the subject has drawn the handles down to just under the level of their chin.  This will have the humerus aligned with the side of their torso, which is the most contracted position for the lats.  And importantly, the wrists can remain flat or straight relative to the forearm in this position, thus minimizing wrist flexion and the limiting discomfort that results.
PULLDOWN VARIATION: As a variation on the pulldown, we may instruct the client to incorporate an abdominal contraction along the way during the concentric, resulting in a fully contracted abdomen at the upper turnaround (remember, the upper turn is a reference to the position of the weight stack, not the limbs of the body).  The wrists should still remain straight and the upper arm still aligns with the side of the torso.  The arms DO NOT pull the handles further down and the elbows DO NOT  travel further back.  It is a subtle and compact abdominal contraction that blends seamlessly into the movement.  If this additional component cannot be mastered, it is not worth incorporating and the ribcage should be held still with the hands stopping just below chin level.  There is still tremendous benefit to the exercise performed as a pulldown for the lats.
Most subjects will assume that they should pull the handles down and back as far as they can, lifting the weights higher.  The instructor should remind them of the real objective to focus on the optimal range of motion for the muscles being targeted.
The trainer will click only after they have visually confirmed that the desirable range of motion has been achieved and the movement has temporarily ceased (i.e. no further contraction is possible or they have arrived at the upper turn).  The instructor needs to be attentive to the likelihood that the client will assume that the movement should continue until they hear the click.  This is especially true on the Pulldown because the concentric portion will terminate with the handles just below the chin.  The client will invariably continue to pull down and back, flexing the wrists more and more to keep the machine moving because they have not yet heard the click.  But the click will ONLY come when the proper range of motion has been achieved and the client has established control (brief pause just below chin level).  So these two objectives are at odds and the instructor needs to anticipate and be assertive to control the outcome.  This will be yet another example of how the trainer cares more about the workout than the client does.
Verbiage used on the concentric might be to “keeping your ribcage still, draw the elbows down and into your sides” or as an extended cue “drive the elbows down into the sides of your ribcage…mmm, hmm…there…[click], ease out, keep that pace.”
Maintain posture, head position, pace, and arm path, and throughout.  Elbows should track through the same path concentrically and eccentrically, to ensure consistent loading of target musculature.
INTENSITY: By definition, the set will end when concentric failure is reached (i.e. subject can no longer lift the weight with perfect form).  This is where we would note the reps and record only the full reps achieved on the chart.  But as discussed throughout the Academy, certain exercises lend themselves to performing additional, partial repetitions and the Pulldown is one of these movements.  Especially when the client is able to perform those partial reps beyond the midpoint and with perfect form.  Of even more importance for the consideration of training beyond concentric failure (i.e. using partial repetitions) would be the experience and tolerance of the individual.  A newer, more deconditioned client would not yet be ready for this more advanced technique.  They can simply perform full repetitions to a point where they begin to fatigue and the effort will probably be enough to provide the desired stimulus.  Of course we are always attempting to progress every client’s understanding of effort and intensity while improving their quality from session to session as is illustrated in the point below.
While we are encouraging the subject to maintain their pace, they should expect to have to increase their effort over the course of a set.  Effort does not remain constant.  In order to maintain a given pace with increasing fatigue, effort needs to voluntarily increase as a counter to the fatigue.  This is how stimulative mechanical tension is created.
NOTES
PULLDOWN vs. TORSO ARM: For the Torso Arm variation of the exercise where the handles point forward and the palms are facing in a neutral grip, essentially everything is the same setup and execution-wise (note: there is no intentional abdominal contraction as is acceptable in the Pulldown).  The subject will keep their head and ribcage still and the elbows are pulled into the side of the torso.  The major difference is the movement plane the exercise takes place in.  The Torso Arm exercise occurs in the frontal plane (an imaginary plane that bisects the body from front to back), whereas the Pulldown occurs in the sagittal plane (bisecting the body between left and right, so arms out in front of the body).  With these different movement planes, there is a slightly different bias to the same muscle groups.  For instance, the Pulldown will bias the thoracic (upper) and lumbar (middle) divisions of the lats while the Torso Arm will bias the iliac (lower) division of the lats.  But both variations will target the lats in an overall fashion especially for more novice trainers.  In most cases, there really is no need to specialize or incorporate both movement patterns in an effort to isolate all regions.
SCAPULOHUMERAL RHYTHM: As an aside, it has become customary to want to over correct any sort of scapular movement on overhead or rowing movements.  To instruct the subject to essentially pin down the shoulder blades during exercise and to not allow them to move.  In keeping with the principles of physiology however, this can establish faulty movement patterns as it obviates the scapulohumeral rhythm specific to the shoulder joint.  See the following link in the Muscle & Motion app for further clarity (https://app.strength.muscleandmotion.com/theory-video/104).  In simple terms, as the arms are raised overhead, the scapulae rotate upward and elevate to support the shoulder joint.  This movement is necessary to accommodate stability at the base of what is essentially a long, movable lever of the arm.  If we do in fact just allow the shoulder blades to move freely in the eccentric phase, we should see that they do in fact “find their optimal position” during the concentric phase of the exercise.  Unless the subject is egregiously shrugging throughout the movement, do not call attention to the shoulder blades at all, just let them perform their function naturally.  It is far more important to stabilize the head and ribcage (posture), establish a consistent arm path and range of motion, and maintain a consistent pace.
The handles should just be within reach while unloaded so that the client can assist the trainer (and vice versa) into the contracted position during the load up.  The client can then set the weight down without assistance to unload at the end of the set.
There will be some clients that have a valgus elbow characterized by an abnormal outward angle of the forearm relative to the humerus.  In more severe cases, movement at the elbow (often on the eccentric) will result in varying degrees of discomfort.  A shortened range of motion that limits elbow extension (larger gap) may be beneficial or performing a pushing movement first can help.  If either of those strategies do not alleviate the issue, it may be beneficial to try the neutral handles (Torso Arm) setup.
Importantly, while learning the Continuous Tension protocol, the subject will most likely be using a relatively light weight and as a result will probably be capable of performing a higher number of reps, spending more time on the machine.  While this may seem conducive to learning, it can also be counterproductive from a discomfort standpoint.  Yes a big part of the learning curve is to be able to produce an effort while managing discomfort, but there can be diminishing returns in that the movement becomes intolerable before it is stimulative.  Ideally we should be striving for perfect form with “faster” reps (i.e. 6 second positive, 6 second negative) and a “heavier” weight that leads to failure in 10 or fewer reps.  While this may not be achievable or advisable in the initial sessions, as long as the subject is demonstrating a clear understanding of the control required, we may progress the intensity more quickly.