Seated Dip - MSF Comprehensive Overview
Target Muscles:
Pectoralis Major - Costal and Sternal Heads (Chest/Pecs) - Shoulder Flexion (from hyperextension), horizontal Adduction
Triceps - Elbow Extension (straightening of arm)
Anterior Deltoid (Shoulder) - Shoulder Flexion
Synergists:
Erector Spinae (Spinal Erectors) - Spinal Extension/Anterior Pelvic Tilt (chest up posture)
Lower Trapezius (Upper Back) - Scapular stabilizers
Serratus Anterior - Scapular Depression and  Protraction
Latissimus Dorsi (Lats) - Assist in Shoulder Flexion from hyperextension to anatomical position
Rotator Cuff - Shoulder stabilizer
Considerations for setup:
Because the seat is higher off the ground than other machines, all clients will require a stool to support the legs.  Some may need a stool for entry so be attentive to this need and proactively guide them in safely.  A lower seat position may be required for those that need assistance or maybe shorter than average.  If this is the case, we should also expect a larger gap to bring the handles further down to meet them.  Try to avoid using the 4 highest/furthest from the floor seat positions (avoid 1-4).
The determination of the seat height will require at least two factors.  Firstly, the seat height will determine the lower turnaround and starting position for the movement.  Secondly, the seat height will determine the intersection of the hands and the movement arm and the resulting shoulder and elbow angles.
Typically, there will be no gap used on the Seated Dip as the seat height determines the lower turn around.  EXCEPTION: In the event that the subject lacks mobility, is severely deconditioned, or is just too short to comfortably get seated, we should opt for a lower/closer to the floor seat setting (seat 5-9).  In this case, we will need to gap the weight stack to lower the handles to properly align with the lower seat setting.  This will allow the subject to more easily get into and out of the machine and they will be better able to reach the stool when performing the exercise.
Keep in mind we are looking for the upper arm to be angled off the body (abducted) approximately 45 to 60 degrees.  The elbow will be bent at approximately 90 degrees or more depending on the mobility and tolerance of the subject.  The humerus will likely be behind the torso to some extent in the starting position.  This will also be influenced by the back pad setting, which is discussed below.  The front or forward most part handles should approximate the hands in this position.
The client will have a choice of either using a neutral hand placement or a pronated hand placement where they “cap” the end of the handle.  It is advisable to use a pair of “Fat Gripz” handles to spread the pressure out over a larger area of the palm for a more comfortable grip.  Also keep in mind that with a pushing exercise like the Seated Dip, Chest Press, and Overhead Press, the subject is not truly gripping the handle but rather pushing through the heel of the hand/palm.
In the interest of safety, the instructor should always err on a more conservative setting by having the seat higher.  If the seat is too low, the shoulder capsule may be overly stretched along with the pecs and the elbow may be hyper flexed.  This will also be influenced by the position of the back pad, which is addressed in the points below.
The size of the seat itself and the manner of execution of the Seated Dip exercise lend itself to fine tuning the subject’s ultimate positioning.  Smaller subjects may find the need to be slightly more forward in the seat while larger subjects may be further back.  Because this exercise is performed with a leaning/rounding forward posture, a larger/longer torso will lean forward more and as a result will likely have to start from further back in the seat to end up in the desired position.  The opposite then is true for shorter torsos.
In the event that a subject’s hands feel as though they will slip forward off the handles, it may be remedied by moving forward in the seat some OR moving the hands slightly back on the handles.
The purpose of the back pad is to oppose the reactionary forces of the movement arm by giving leverage to the torso.  As such the back pad should be angled forward and lowered down to meet the mid/upper back.  When properly set, the back pad will also likely cause the subject to have to lean forward some, resulting in more of a stretch at the chest and shoulder and an increase in elbow flexion.  This is why the seat height, back pad, and position on the seat must be considered together when determining the optimal starting point of the exercise for each individual.
The instructor must take into consideration that when the movement is loaded, the resulting compression of the padding, lifting out of the seat and into the belt, and flexing of the movement arms will create more space than was apparent without loading.  As such, further adjustments may be warranted.
Posture/Get Set:
Ensure seat back is raised up and out of the way in order to get the subject properly seated.
Chest up, hips back, chin slightly tucked (neutral) with shoulders held in retraction.  This will happen naturally as the seat height and back pad will force the posture in a sense, aside from the head position.  Upper arms should be abducted (pointed back and out to the sides) somewhere between 45 to 60 degrees and the elbows will be bent 90 degrees or more based on the mobility and tolerance of the subject.  The seat belt should be fastened and tightly secured as the reactionary forces will lift the subject out of the seat.
Note: while the get set posture has the chest up and shoulder blades retracted, the movement will finish in a moderate to full protraction as the elbows straighten.  See Execution below.
Once seated and belted in place, the seat back is lowered to the desired setting  See setting considerations above.
The feet should be in contact with a stool for added stability and comfort.  If the feet are left dangling, there will be an inability to properly maintain position and there will be a loss of output and stability.  Not to mention that many subjects will find this uncomfortable and distracting.  The more someone is given an opportunity to move, shift, or wiggle, the less effective the exercise will be and there is an additional element of risk.
Hands are placed at or near the ends of the movement arm, preferably on a pair of Fat Gripz handles.  The subject will have a choice of either neutral or pronated, with the latter requiring the hands to be placed at the very ends.  In some cases a subject may find the hand placement uncomfortable and a slight adjustment is permitted.  Consider hand pads too in an effort to blunt the pressure.
The movement will begin at the lower turnaround.
Execution, Instruction, and Turnarounds:
From the starting position (lower turn), keeping chest up with shoulders in retraction and chin slightly tucked in a neutral head position, upper arms abducted, establish breathing then gradually apply pressure through the heel of the palms.
Once the instructor has given the cue to begin the load up, there should be a quiet moment where the instructor is intently observing the actions.  If done properly, a simple “mmm, hmm” or “yes, just like that” is an opportunity for positive reinforcement.
The subject will have no choice but to leverage off of the back pad but it may be helpful to draw awareness to its use.
The movement arms will travel down below the level of the seat as the client attempts to (1) completely straighten the arms, (2) protract the shoulder blades, and (3) tighten the abdomen.  These three components are most easily performed in a blended and synergistic fashion.
There is no end stop on this movement so the instructor must watch intently for those three components to occur and for the movement to cease before clicking.  This is the upper turnaround.
Most subjects will assume that they should push the handles down as far as they can, lifting the weights higher.  The instructor should remind them of the real objective to focus on fully exhausting the three components of the fully contracted position.
The trainer will click only after they have visually confirmed that the desirable range of motion has been achieved and the movement has temporarily ceased (i.e. no further contraction is possible).  The instructor needs to be attentive to the likelihood that the client will assume that the movement should continue until they hear the click.  But the opposite is true.  The click will ONLY happen when the proper range of motion has been achieved by the client.  So these two objectives are at odds and the instructor needs to anticipate and be assertive to control the outcome.  This will be yet another example of how the trainer cares more about the workout than the client does.
Verbiage used on the concentric might be to “drive your arms straight, and tighten down hard on the abdominals, keep breathing, [click], ease out” or to “keep straightening, keep breathing, round your back hard into the back pad, [click], ease out.”  Remember, the MSF Exercise Practitioner is always looking to teach clients HOW to properly execute the movements on a path toward mastery.  As such, our instruction needs to travel on that path as well.
Once the load up and first concentric have been completed and the instructor clicks to indicate the beginning of the eccentric phase, the instructor then needs to establish the expectation for the first lower turnaround of the set.  On a Seated Dip the lower turnaround will be as the weight stack touches and can be cued with something to the effect of, “touch and go” or “be continuous” or “do not pause” or “barely touch, barely start”.  Remember, there is always a cue to give on the first eccentric of an exercise.
One continuous pace with only the briefest pause allowed as the instructor attentively observes the full excursion of the concentric phase before immediately clicking the subject back into the eccentric.  This pattern is carried out until concentric movement stalls, which constitutes reaching muscular failure.
Maintain posture, head position, pace, and arm path, and throughout.  Elbows should track through the same path concentrically and eccentrically, to ensure consistent loading of target musculature.
And while we are encouraging the subject to maintain their pace, they should expect to have to increase their effort over the course of a set.  Effort does not remain constant.  In order to maintain a given pace with increasing fatigue, effort needs to voluntarily increase as a counter to the fatigue.  This is how stimulative mechanical tension is created.
NOTES
It may be necessary or beneficial to describe “gradual” to the subject (e.g. 20 pounds of pressure, 40 pounds, 60 pounds, eventually reaching enough force to begin moving).  Or have client imagine that there was 100 pounds on weight stack and they are to gradually find 101 pounds of pressure, or just enough to crack the weight stack.  Also remind them that this gradual load up may take 3 to 5 seconds before movement actually occurs.
There is no pause on a seated dip.  It is one continuous effort.  Care should still be given to exaggerate control on the changes of direction (“drag out the turn” or “almost pause but don’t”).  Also make sure the subject reaches the fully contracted position (upper turn) prior to the click that indicates the change of direction.  New instructors tend to click too soon causing confusion on exactly where the change of direction occurs.
Importantly, while learning the Continuous Tension protocol, the subject will most likely be using a relatively light weight and as a result will probably be capable of performing a higher number of reps, spending more time on the machine.  While this may seem conducive to learning, it can also be counterproductive from a discomfort standpoint.  Yes a big part of the learning curve is to be able to produce an effort while managing discomfort, but there can be diminishing returns in that the movement becomes intolerable before it is stimulative.  Ideally we should be striving for perfect form with “faster” reps (i.e. 6 second positive, 6 second negative) and a “heavier” weight that leads to failure in 10 or fewer reps.  While this may not be achievable or advisable in the initial sessions, as long as the subject is demonstrating a clear understanding of the control required, we may progress the intensity more quickly.