Triceps Extension - MSF Comprehensive Overview
Target Muscles:
Triceps Brachii (Triceps - short head) - Elbow Extension
Synergists:
Rectus Abdominis - (Abdominals) - Thorax stabilizer
Considerations for setup:
The primary consideration for this exercise will be the seat height.  In some cases there may be a gap required depending on the location of the movement arm at rest relative to the client’s proportions and tolerance at the lower turnaround.
Determine the seat height by first taking into account the height of the subject.  Taller subjects will most likely have a lower seat, shorter subjects will have a higher seat.
Similar to the Biceps Curl, as a rotary movement, the Triceps Extension has a single axis of rotation and in theory, this axis is to be aligned with the axis of rotation of the body, the elbow joint.  But because of differences in individual humerus lengths, there will be instances where direct alignment is not possible.  As long as we can get close, there should be no negative impact on the safety or effectiveness of the exercise.
And just like the Biceps Curl, the proper seat height will allow the upper arm of the subject to lay flush along the pad.  The subject should be sitting upright with their chest against the pad and their arms will lay over the pad  out in front of them.
To test for this alignment, it may be beneficial to pin the movement arm down into the contracted (extended) position.  This will create space to observe the congruency of the upper arm to the pad.
If the seat were set too high, the upper arm would hover above the pad and the elbow would be the only point of the arm that made contact with the pad.  Remember, the entire length of the upper arm (humerus) should lay along and make contact with the pad.  If the seat were set too low, the elbow would not be able to make contact with the pad.
This movement will start at lower turnaround with the elbows flexed so that the hands can rest along the pads on the movement arm.  In this position, the movement arm should NOT be near the subject’s face.  Depending on the length of the kevlar belt however, some machines may have the movement arm too close to the subject’s face.  In these situations a gap will have to be set.  This will be determined by the Studio Leader/Owner in consultation with MSF Corporate.
In addition to the situation outlined in the point above, there may be certain subjects that will require a gap because of a significant lack of strength in the lengthened position.  Even with the minimal load of twenty pounds, some subjects will be unable to produce enough force to start the exercise.  In this case we will need to set a gap.  Over time with continued sessions, we will most likely be able to decrease the gap until the subject is able to use the full range of motion of the machine.
Posture/Get Set:
This exercise utilizes a PPT which requires a contracted abdomen that leads to a rounded back posture.  Most subjects will instinctively sit with their chest up and back arched.  One should always consider the required posture and the details of the load up as an integral component of the exercise itself.
When applying pressure to the movement arm, there will be an equal and opposite reaction that is applied against the torso.  A braced abdomen will resist this reaction and allow the triceps to produce movement at the elbow against a challenging load.
Additionally, placing the feet under the foot pads and cinching the seat belt tightly across the lap will assist in providing stability.
Execution, Instruction, and Turnarounds:
LOAD UP:  From the starting position (lower turn), tighten the abdomen, neutral head position, face relaxed, arms in place with palms facing and bladed hands…establish breathing and gradually begin to apply pressure by driving out from the elbows.
Once the instructor has given the cue to begin the load up, there should be a quiet moment where the instructor is intently observing the actions.  If done properly, a simple “perfect” or “yes, just like that” is an opportunity for positive feedback.
CONCENTRIC/UPPER TURN:  Subject will move through this first concentric phase maintaining a smooth pace, keeping the abdomen tight, and attempting to straighten the elbows until they can no longer contract any further (upper turn).  Once the desired duration is achieved in the contracted position (either brief pause of 1 second or slightly longer squeeze of 2 to 3 seconds), the instructor will [Click] at that exact moment.
ECCENTRIC:  The click is immediately followed with the instruction to “ease out,  do not speed up” or something to that effect.
The instructor then needs to establish the expectation for the first lower turnaround of the set, which on the Triceps Extension will be to “touch and go” or “be continuous” or “seamlessly change directions”.  Remember, there is always a cue to give on the first eccentric of an exercise.
LOWER TURN:  Touch and go at the lower turn as if “continuously passing through the bottom.”
Keep the abdomen contracted and the upper arm firmly leveraged against the pad.
One continuous pace with only a “brief but definite” pause of about one second in the contracted position of the first two reps and a squeeze of two to three seconds from the third rep on.  Keep in mind, we cannot simply rely on the cue of ‘squeeze’ in this situation.  That can mean various things to different people.  We need to teach them HOW to squeeze.
Verbiage for the pause/squeeze in the contracted position might be “continue to drive the edge of your hands into the pad as you straighten your elbows as hard as you can…keep breathing, keep still, [click], ease out, don’t speed up” or “keeping your head still, patiently attempt to over-straighten your elbows…there, lock it in place, [click], ease out.”  So during the desired duration of the squeeze in the contracted position, we are providing actionable instruction.
Keep in mind, most subjects will assume that they should keep pushing the movement arm down as far as they can to move the machine further.  This will result in a tendency to lift the arms/elbows off the pad.  The instructor should remind them of the real objective to focus on the optimal range of motion for the muscles being targeted, which in this case is to fully straighten the elbow.  Once they have reached that point the focus should stay on the triceps and trying to contract them as hard as possible.
The trainer will click only after they have visually confirmed that the desirable range of motion has been achieved and the movement has temporarily ceased (i.e. no further contraction of the triceps is possible).  The instructor needs to be attentive to the likelihood that the client will assume that the movement should continue until they hear the click.  But the opposite is true.  The [click] will ONLY come when the proper range of motion has been achieved and the client has established control (brief pause in contracted position).  So these two objectives are at odds and the instructor needs to anticipate and be assertive to control the outcome.  This will be yet another example of how the trainer cares more about the workout than the client does.
Verbiage used on the concentric might be to “keep your midsection tight and drive the elbows forward as you sink the edge of your hands into the pads” or “maintain the contact of your upper arm as you drive your elbows straight”.
INTENSITY: By definition, the set will end when concentric failure is reached (i.e. subject can no longer reach the initially attained degree of elbow extension with perfect form).  This is where we would note the reps and record only the full reps achieved on the chart.  But as discussed throughout the Academy, certain exercises lend themselves to performing additional, partial repetitions.  So even though the subject cannot fully extend the elbow, there may be a substantial amount of strength remaining.  Especially when they are able to perform those partial reps beyond the midpoint and with perfect form.
Of even more importance for the consideration of training beyond concentric failure (i.e. using partial repetitions) would be the experience and tolerance level of the individual.  A newer, more deconditioned client would not yet be ready for this more advanced technique.  They can simply perform full repetitions to a point where they begin to fatigue and the effort will probably be enough to provide the desired stimulus.  Of course we are always attempting to progress every client’s understanding of effort and intensity while improving their quality from session to session as is illustrated in the point below.
While we are encouraging the subject to maintain their pace, they should expect to have to increase their effort over the course of a set.  Effort does not remain constant.  In order to maintain a given pace with increasing fatigue, effort needs to voluntarily increase as a counter to the fatigue.  This is how stimulative mechanical tension is created.
NOTES
There is typically no gap used on this exercise but there are a couple of situations where it may be warranted.  If a subject is considerably weak in this movement and especially at the load up and lower turnaround, a gap will help them be able to perform this exercise and to progress.  Additionally, if the movement arm at rest is near a subject’s face, we will want to create space to ensure their safety by using a gap.
This exercise may be performed isometrically for individuals with an injury such as tennis or golfers elbow. (Static Hold or Timed Static Contraction).  As with all static holds, the instructor will assist the subject to the position in which the exercise will be performed and will take the movement arm back to the resting position when finished.  See the section on Static Holds and Timed Static Contractions for more details on the setup and execution.
Importantly, while learning the Continuous Tension protocol, the subject will most likely be using a relatively light weight and as a result will probably be capable of performing a higher number of reps, spending more time on the machine.  While this may seem conducive to learning, it can also be counterproductive from a discomfort standpoint.  Yes a big part of the learning curve is to be able to produce an effort while managing discomfort, but there can be diminishing returns in that the movement becomes intolerable before it is stimulative.  Ideally we should be striving for perfect form with “faster” reps (i.e. 6 second positive, 6 second negative) and a “heavier” weight that leads to failure in 10 or fewer reps.  While this may not be achievable or advisable in the initial sessions, as long as the subject is demonstrating a clear understanding of the control required, we may progress the intensity more quickly.
The stronger an individual gets at this exercise, the more they will have to rely on stabilizing with their abdomen.  The instructor should keep this in mind as far as where to place this exercise in the workout sequence to better optimize all exercises.  If one were to perform the abdominal exercise immediately before the triceps extension, they may not be able to properly brace to get the effect we seek for the triceps.
Among the biggest discrepancies to be expected on this machine will be to lift the upper arms and elbows off the pad, even subtly, to be able to push the movement arm further.  But this again falls under the assumed objective of exercise, which is to keep the movement arm moving or to move it further.  The instructor must continually watch for these tendencies and remind the client of the real objective; to create as much tension in the targeted muscle fibers as possible at that moment.  By lifting the arms off the pad, we unload the triceps and outsource the effort to other muscles.  This concept will most likely be the most challenging one to convince clients of and the most important.