Continuous Tension Method
Athletic Performance
Many will wonder if the Continuous Tension method will hinder athletic performance.  The answer is absolutely not!  In fact, it will only enhance sports performance.  Any increases in strength and/or improvement in body composition as a result of strength training will improve functional ability and, therefore, athletic performance.  Simply stated, a stronger person is a more capable person.
Sports performance, like any physical endeavor, requires varying degrees of skill.  Skill in a sport is the ability to perform precision movements at the right time, successfully, regularly, and with minimal effort.  By strengthening the muscles, an athlete will have better control of fast movements, will be able to perform them more easily, and will increase their resistance to injury.
Research has shown that strength gains made with a fast speed of movement are not transferable to slower speeds. But strength gains made with a slow speed of movement are carried over to a faster speed of movement.  It should also be noted here that when strength training intensely and at near maximal effort, oftentimes the speed of the movement itself is slow despite the trainee's intent to move faster.  It is this INTENT to move faster that creates the training stimulus we seek in the form of effective reps.
The significance of that research is the discovery that fast movements are skill-dependent (Tai Chi Chuan practitioners have known that for two thousand years).  Strength is not actually increased with fast speeds, which makes sense if you consider that a heavy or challenging load relative to the trainee's capabilities cannot be moved fast.  This would be the same situation with a fatigued trainee, near muscular failure; the load would not be able to be accelerated.  And if a load can be moved fast or accelerated, there is an introduction of momentum, which we have previously pointed out will decrease mechanical tension.  So when we take these things into consideration, we realize that skill is increased and is limited by general strength.  The strength gained at slower speeds can be used with any activity, and it can enhance skills requiring fast movements.
To say it another way, the skill level of a movement is limited by the strength of the muscles being used to perform that movement.  Increase the strength and the potential for skill increase is made available.  The strength increase does not guarantee an increase in skill, however.  The skill must be continually rehearsed for an improvement to be made.
Research has also shown that strength will increase only if a muscle is stimulated according to that muscle’s function. Attempting to improve a skill by mimicking that skill in an exercise fashion will not increase the skill.  It may, in fact, undermine and inhibit the skill.  The mimicked motion is enhanced, but not the actual motion.