Continuous Tension Method
Performing the Continuous Tension Method
A Continuous Tension repetition involves lifting the resistance in 6 to 10 seconds (the positive or concentric phase of movement) and lowering the resistance in 6 to 10 seconds (the negative or eccentric phase of movement).  Every effort should be made to maintain a constant pace in both directions of a movement with a potentially slower cadence used for beginners or those with an injury or other physical compromise.
An emphasis is placed on the most contracted position on movements that are rotary (single-joint exercises). On most exercises that are compound (more than one joint movement), a continuous smooth motion should occur. The change in direction from the negative phase to the positive (called the "lower turnaround") should be smooth and controlled.  In some cases, it may be advisable to actually slow down a faster-paced eccentric as one approaches the lower turnaround in order to maintain the exaggerated control we require that is void of momentum or a pause. This will also serve to keep the muscles under a constant level of tension and create a safer set of exercise.
The Exercise Practitioner must develop a keen eye for movement quality in order to provide meaningful and timely instruction to ensure exercise accuracy and safety, particularly involving the pace and changes of direction.  This instruction becomes even more valuable and critical further into a set where a client may experience discomfort or duress.  While the encouragement of effort is definitely part of an instructor's role, this should never overshadow the encouragement of safety and control.  The true challenge for an advanced client is to execute with the highest level of intensity (effort) while maintaining strict control of the movement.  To teach clients to operate in this manner and to be able to progress both of these variables becomes the true challenge for the instructor as well.
The number of repetitions or set duration is a controlling factor in determining how much resistance would be optimal for any given trainee.  Any less than 5 repetitions and the resistance is most likely too heavy.  Now for an advanced client, 4 or 5 reps may be an appropriately loaded set but most would benefit from a slightly lighter load that allows for potentially better control.  Sets performed with upwards of 12 or more reps tend to create higher levels of discomfort leading to higher levels of perceived effort. This ultimately leads to a greater degree of fatigue, which decreases motor unit recruitment thus minimizing the potential stimulus. Not only that, but maintaining focus and quality are made more difficult with longer duration sets.  Keep in mind however, that this lighter weight and higher repetition count may be useful for beginners or injured clients or even intensity-adverse trainees.  But in order to stimulate the muscle to change, it needs to be challenged with a high degree of mechanical tension and a limited amount of fatigue.  This is best accomplished and supported in the literature as a set of somewhere between 5 and 10 repetitions taken to or near muscular failure.
Some trainees achieve better results and are more compliant at the upper end of the repetition range, while others need and thrive on fewer repetitions.  Again, this is part of the ever-evolving skill set of the Exercise Practitioner to discern what approach to take or to at least be able to facilitate what clients relate better to what strategy.