Continuous Tension Method
Other Factors to Consider
In addition to the pace of the movement and the handling of the changes of direction, several other factors must be implemented in order to properly perform our protocol.  The most important of the other factors is the prevention of the Valsalva maneuver.  The Valsalva is an instinctive mechanism whereby the subject will hold their breath while simultaneously exerting physically.  It's a protective measure taken by the body to provide rigidity through the torso that allows for a brief increase in force production.  This oftentimes goes unnoticed and again is instinctive.
Take for instance, a situation where someone is going to pick up a heavy bag of mulch in the backyard or is about to lift a small child.  At that moment, they will hold their breath and possibly let out a small grunt as they complete their task.  If this breath-holding is maintained for a duration, there are a host of potential negative consequences associated with this.  Among them are increased blood pressure and altered cardiac output.
For our purposes, we're looking to sustain a muscular effort for a period of time that exceeds a brief moment.  In order to do this, one needs to breathe the entire time, especially as the duration, and thus effort, increases.  By doing so, the trainee will maintain safe levels of their internal environment and they will be able to use less weight making the exercise safer.  By avoiding this bracing mechanism that breath holding provides, a lighter weight will "feel" heavier and there will be a more direct loading of the targeted muscles.
Our clients are instructed to breathe freely for the duration of the exercise, and those respirations should actually increase with exertion.  It is very similar to what happens when you walk up several flights of stairs; as you climb higher, the muscles are working harder, so the heart and lungs increase their function as well as our breathing increases to support the effort.  This may be the most challenging aspect of the Continuous Tension method for a trainee to master because they are having to overcome a programmed instinct.  In any event, the instructor needs to reiterate the importance of breathing and must enforce its compliance.
Another component of our protocol to consider is that of the anatomical positioning or posture for each exercise.  Each exercise has an ideal posture that will ensure safety as well as proper and direct loading of the targeted musculature.  For single-joint movements, the axis of rotation of the machine should be aligned with the center of the joint that is being used.  Compound exercises have a more theoretical alignment that do not necessarily seek to match a part of the machine with a part of the body.  These need to be considered on a machine-to-machine and client-by-client basis and should become part of the Exercise Practitioner's skill set.
These obvious positioning elements aside, the actual posture assumed on each exercise is critical.  For the most part, our exercises will utilize one of two general postures, a posterior pelvic tilt or an anterior pelvic tilt.  A posterior pelvic tilt requires a contracted abdomen (not necessarily "drawn in") whereby the bottom of the front of the ribcage is brought closer toward the top of the front of the pelvis and vice versa.  This is accomplished through a contraction of the rectus abdominis.  An anterior pelvic tilt is simply lifting the front of the ribcage away from the pelvis.  This is accomplished by lifting the chest and creating a slight arch in the lower back.
When a trainee is positioned at the beginning of an exercise, this is called the "get-set."  The trainee is expected to "lock" this posture in place.  In most cases, part of the benefit of the exercise is the effort it takes to maintain the get-set posture.  This is also something that the instructor to watch for and preemptively cue as a reminder for the client.
A primary component of the posture on any given movement involves the placement of the head.  Most of the time, the trainee will maintain what's referred to as a neutral head and neck position; this balances the tension around the neck muscles to share more equally in the support of the head.  This is especially critical during moments of exertion where the risk of straining is greatly increased.  Clients should maintain a still, neutral head and neck for the duration of the exercise.
There are exceptions to the posture restraints on movements involving flexion, extension, or rotation of the trunk or the cervical extension exercise.  But for a majority of exercises, the trainee should expect and be challenged and reminded to keep their ribcage and head still!