Continuous Tension Method
What Makes the Continuous Tension Method Effective?
Safe and efficient muscular loading—via high mechanical tension—is the defining feature of the MSF protocol. Continuous Tension repetitions minimize momentum, which otherwise reduces tension on the target musculature. As momentum is controlled, tension progressively increases until the nervous system can no longer recruit additional motor units. At this point, contraction velocity (internal) and external movement speed involuntarily slow. This involuntary slowing indicates full motor unit recruitment and peak effort, where target fibers experience meaningful mechanical tension. These repetitions are referred to as stimulating (productive/effective) reps.
It is important to note here that "full motor unit recruitment" is a relative term and is highly specific to the individual.  It is unlikely that a person is truly able to recruit 100% of their motor units involved in a given movement.  And, in general, more experienced trainees will be able to recruit more of their motor units than newer trainees.
In an effort to maintain a continuous pace, the trainee should begin to push/pull harder (voluntarily increase effort), thus attempting additional effective reps leading to an increase in stimulus-inducing mechanical tension.  During this critical time in a set, it needs to be reinforced that the trainee and instructor are still focused on quality and attempting to maintain a pace between 6 and 10 seconds.
A conservative estimate of an approximate 6-second concentric/eccentric is the minimum cadence that will truly control momentum for most subjects.  Importantly, this is really just a guideline that has been established with the primary goal of client safety in mind.  There is no “magic” in the number itself.  And while some research may suggest that intentionally slow movements are not necessarily more stimulative, they are undoubtedly safer.  This is reason enough to adopt a controlled movement approach.  Furthermore, if the client is properly informed and directed, they will eventually get to the more beneficial, involuntary slow reps soon after they commence a set of exercise using our Continuous Tension method.
A 10-second pace is the maximum.  Going slower than 10 seconds can cause the movement to become segmented, and portions of a movement may become a respite giving some of the active fibers a chance to recover.  In addition, an unusually slow pace will lead to higher levels of discomfort, causing the trainee to prematurely reach task failure.  Essentially, the discomfort is the reason for terminating the set, thus stopping short of a fully stimulated muscle.  (Note: task failure is the preferred physiological term for what used to be called “muscular failure”. This distinction was necessary because subjects do not reach failure because their muscles fail.  Instead, they decide to stop performing the task because of information sent to the brain from the periphery based on the intensity of the activity.  This is a protective mechanism to prevent the subject from running out of ATP, which would be deadly).
While there is not exactly one ideal pace for exercise, somewhere between 6 and 10 seconds should result in a movement that minimizes momentum and avoids a respite and unproductive discomfort.  Again it is important to note that different trainees will gravitate to different ends of the ranges.  Ultimately the clients should be empowered to control their movement and fully understand what productive training requires.  These are attributes that can be refined and progressed for a lifetime and it will be the responsibility of a highly skilled Exercise Practitioner to develop insight to help guide this process.
More important than the actual speed of the movement, is establishing and keeping control of the resistance.  Each exercise has different ranges of motion.  Some exercises, like the Pullover, have a long range of motion compared to the shorter stroke of a Calf Raise.  Naturally, the shorter range of motion of the calf exercise requires less time for a repetition.    Also of note are the differences in limb length of clients, which will lead to different distances moved for a given exercise.  Someone with longer legs would most likely be expected to have a longer excursion time on a leg press than someone with shorter legs.  These are also reasons for having an acceptable range of 6 to 10 seconds rather than one specific cadence.
The challenge for the trainee is to "feel" what proper control is under extreme stress.  And to become more adept over time at having an awareness of all of the details that the Continuous Tension method requires.  The challenge for the instructor is to be able to observe and interpret movement and effort and provide meaningful, timely instruction to direct the client.  This, along with safety, are the main reasons someone should be supervised during productive exercise.
Learning our Continuous Tension method requires more engagement and effort than just merely going in and lifting weights.  It requires steadfast concentration and disciplined practice and, more importantly, skilled instruction.  This is yet another way a MSF Exercise Practitioner distinguishes themselves in the industry.
A properly performed MaxStrength Fitness exercise session is anything but fun.  It is extremely challenging and can involve a high degree of discomfort.  But productive exercise has to be this way.  The human body is a stubborn and efficient organism that would rather not exert at these high levels or build new strength and muscle.  It is too metabolically expensive.  But if one can learn to appreciate the details in the process and rise to the challenge, the physical and mental benefits will be well worth the effort.