Initial Consultation Script
Greeting:
Hi (First name), I’m (your name), nice to meet you? Any problems finding us?
(Depending on location: Willoughby example below)
Restrooms: If you ever need to use the restrooms, they are down the hall on your left hand side.
Secure their items: If you ever need to change, we have 2 changing rooms and we have lockers where you can secure your items and coat hooks if you prefer to just hand up your coat.
Come in with me and I’ll give you a quick tour and we’ll get started!
Tour:
(Upon entering the studio area) The first thing you notice is we keep it cool.  We keep the temperature about 67 degrees. We do that to keep your body efficient while you exercise. Just like your car, if it overheats it doesn't run as well, it's a mechanical process. Same thing holds true for your body. But a lot of people think you need to sweat to be productive. Not true. The bonus is you don’t have to worry about showering or grooming and you can wear pretty much whatever you want so you can go right back to your busy day.
It’s also distraction free. No mirrors or music. Most gyms are social settings: music blaring, people socializing. You can’t truly focus in those environments.  Our protocol is therapeutic in nature so we need your focus so we can get the most out of your workout. Plus you’re always 1-1 with your trainer. You’re always under our expert care. It’s not group classes or come in on your own.
The equipment has very low friction which allows you to move slowly to keep tension on your muscles which robs the body of momentum and keeps it safe.  We’ll go through a demo workout in a moment, but first let’s sit down and chat.
Medical History:
I see from your medical history that you have XXX.  We can definitely help with that (stated only if we can).
With our protocol being based on a therapeutic approach we can typically help with most orthopedic issues.  Where most trainers would either avoid it or make it worse. We like to fix people rather than break them.
Physical Activity:
You listed, xxx, xxx, and xxx or nothing currently.
(It’s good to get a sense of what they’ve done in the past to gauge their level of comfort in exercising)
Never strength trained in the past? Good, we don't have to undo any bad habits!
Goals:
I see your goals are to xxxx.  We help clients just like you everyday (restate their goals).
The only reason this doesn’t work is if you don’t come consistently. Otherwise, it’s a result-driven program.
Preliminary considerations:
Now that I know where you’re at, and I know where you want to get to, let's talk about how we can bridge that gap through this methodology, because it is very different.
Nothing loose in mouth:
First off, when you come in, nothing loose in your mouth, gum, cough drop,  etc. It becomes a choking hazard. Anything loose in your mouth, we’ll kindly ask you to discard before training.
Breathing:
Secondly, Breathing: We want you to avoid holding your breath at all cost. If you do, your BP goes up 2-4 times its normal rate. As it gets harder, breathe more. Demonstrate. This allows you to get a profound benefit when it comes to your cardiovascular system. So humor me and breathe more than you think you have to. Give it a handful of sessions along with our guidance and it just becomes a learned behavior.
Today’s workout: Don’t be concerned with a good workout. We’re focusing on concepts and form. If it feels a little easy or a bit challenging, either is ok. But it’s nowhere near what you’ll become accustomed to, because it doesn’t have to be. We’ll meet you where you’re at and progress you at your pace. Enjoy the honeymoon while it lasts. Lol
Are you ready to take a look?
Demo Workout:
I'm going to teach you the leg press first for two reasons. 1. Once you know how to do this piece of equipment you know 80% of the information to do anything else inside the studio so it's a good teaching tool, but more importantly it works more muscles than any other exercise possible, so it gives us your biggest bang for your buck. And then we'll do an upper body exercise.
To enter, what I want you to do is have a seat here and put your feet on that metal platform below you. Make sure your hips are all the way back and go ahead and lay back like you’re in a recliner chair and just stay right there. I'm going to bring the shoulder pads down to you. They're going to just graze your shoulders.
A couple of things before we get started and these are all for your safety and performance. When you're moving in the machine, I always want your vision straight ahead. The reason I don't want you moving your head around is because if you do it's a good way to strain the neck. So, you want to think of your instructor like a speaker on the wall instructing you once you start moving in the machines. The other thing once you start moving, is I want your face relaxed. I don't want to see moaning, groaning, grimacing… it's a lot of stress on the neck and a lot of wasted nervous energy.  We should see and hear the effort you're giving us through that breathing I mentioned earlier.
Go ahead and put your feet up on that foot plate. There's no weight on the machine. I'm just going to assess your foot position.  We want your feet about shoulder width apart.   What I'm looking for is a straight line between your ankle, knee, hip, and shoulder. So, it's a good biomechanical position that takes stress off the joints and it keeps tension on the targeted muscles. When you're moving in the machine you want to make sure you maintain that straight relationship. You want to make sure that your knee goes through the foot and back through that shoulder in that linear path. In other words, I don't want to see the knees going in or out.
Go ahead and take your hands and kind of cup them and put them on your kneecaps like that.  Notice now the foot plate is moving.  I'm going to bring you and the machine forward, so we keep this slight bend in your knee. Keep that position for me and just keep pressure through your heels and just relax for me and I’ll bring you forward. Just follow me up. Go ahead and push against that. You can't lock your knees out right? Now hold right there but just ease up. You don't have to push hard.
Now take your hands and put them down on the handles. Anytime I give you a handle I want your hands relaxed. If you're squeezing your hands you're decreasing blood flow through your body, which is not a good thing. So hands should stay relaxed and as I just mentioned your face should stay relaxed.
This slight bent knee position we want to maintain. We've set the machine so that as you come out we never fully extend/hyperextend the knee for two reasons: 1. if you hyperextend the knee there's no exercise, you're resting on your bones with a straight limb and that defeats the purpose. We want tension on the muscle the entire time and more importantly you could hyperextend that knee and tear your ACL. And that would suck.  We don’t want you to get hurt.  This stop will prevent you from resting and it'll prevent you from getting injured.
When you start pushing through the footplate to get this to move, primarily think through your heel not your forefoot. Your foot should stay flat but just think pressure through the heel. As you fatigue, which is the goal, and more on that in a minute, you are going to want to make it easier and lift your heels up, don't.	Keep pressure through the heel and it helps keep the larger muscles: your quads, your glutes, and your hamstrings loaded.  Your calf will work, but it's indirect.
When I do tell you to start, don't do it all at once… take… your… time… In other words, from the moment I tell you to start to the moment this starts to move away from you, which it will, it should take you about five to seven seconds.  In other words you should start so slow that I can barely even tell you're starting the exercise. Ever get a new car and you're unsure how sensitive that gas pedal is? Don't go through my wall.
Now I'm going to bring you backwards and when we do we're going to let the knees bend towards the shoulders and we're going to set your starting position. When I get your knees back to about 90 degrees, I'm going to reach across you and pin the weight stack and then I'll tell you to slowly begin.
You'll begin slowly until you come out and feel the end stop position and then that'll be your cue to slowly come back down. You'll come down until you feel or hear it touch and that'll be your cue to slowly change direction.  You’re going to want to fire out of the bottom, don’t! Think of this like one slow loop back and forth, back, and forth. There's no starting and stopping, it's just continuous. The only thing throughout the exercise that should change, if needed, would be your breathing.  The harder it gets the more you breathe.  Just don't hold your breath and if you do, I'll tell you to breathe.
Any questions so far? All right here we go… just bend your knees back with me. Keep coming back, keep coming back, and you can tolerate that right? Relax your face, think about your breathing, and show me how slow, through your heels, you can start to make that move.
LP instruction:
Perform a set of leg press for about 5-7 reps. Focus on speed of motion, movement pattern, breathing and facial expressions.  (may use a static hold in the mid range on the last negative to get more of an effect).
Good, don't speed up. Just keep coming out until you feel it stop. Once you feel it stops, slowly come back. Keep going, keep going, good slowly return.  You'll come back until your knees will come towards your shoulders and keep pressure through the heels.  You're going to barely touch and barely start. You’ve got an inch, half an inch, you'll feel it touch… slowly return out.  Good, just breathe and push.  Excellen, push through the heels, straighten those legs,  slowly come backwards towards the shoulders. You're doing great.  The only thing that should change if needed would be the breathing.  So the harder it gets the more you breathe and if you don’t need to just continuously breathe.   Touch and go… slowly go out.  Extend those legs through those heels… touch and go…  slowly come back, knees towards your shoulders… keep coming…we're going to do one more rep… I want you to barely touch and barely start off the bottom here, make a study out of it.   Just enough to move,  good, continue to breathe… grind it out… perfect… keep inching forward… straighten those legs… keep going… good, slowly come back, knees towards shoulders,  stay with me.   Keep your calm, keep your breathing, keep your control …we're going to put this to an end but keep moving. I want you to pause right there (mid range)… just push through your heels to hold it.. don't let it move, just hold it and  breathe.  The harder it gets the more your breath… just hold that position for five and breathe.. 4..3..2…1 and  slowly come down. When you feel it touch you're going to relax. Great job! Stay right there, don't move.
Exit
Now drop your feet down to that platform again. (Instructor is holding the foot plate in place). You're going to pivot out to your left, stand but don't walk.
Explanation of LP experience:
So I think you can appreciate having just experienced that, the slower we go the harder it becomes, but the more tension we create on the muscle. And that's all we're after, tension the entire time. It robs the body of momentum, and it takes all the stress off the joints but that's how we get a profound effect in a fraction of the time most people spend in the gym.   It's quality over quantity.   When you come in you're going to have a full tank of gas, energy and strength.  Our sole goal is to momentarily weaken you as best we can.  We want to empty that gas tank. We call that an inroad. We want you to fatigue because that's the stimulus that creates change once you walk out the door.   Then we allow two to three days of rest and recovery; move, be active, do your walking, and then bring you back and repeat that process.   That's why we only train up to twice a week. More is not better once done correctly.
As you fatigue your mind will take on a fight or flight response.  You’re going to want to attack it or run away from it.  I want you to do neither.   If it moves, it moves, and if it doesn’t, who cares… the intent is never to move the weight, it's solely to fatigue the muscle. We stay calm and combat that fight or flight response by going to your breathing. Your breathing keeps you in the running and it keeps us safe. and it keeps us under control, and it keeps our mind calm. Eventually you might reach a point in time at which you fail. Failure means, despite your best breathing, effort, or speed, and calm you can no longer move, but we'll tell you to move as hard and as fast as you can, you will try, but it will not go. That's good, but more importantly it's safe.  It's safe because you can't injure yourself when you're not moving. We only injure ourselves when we ballistically lunge and heave. Think CrossFit and these other ballistic modalities.   We don't allow that to happen. It's good because again that ensures change happens once you walk out the door. So we stay calm and stay in the running through the breathing. So now that you know the goal is to fatigue the muscle because that’s what creates change, I need you to come into this type of training with the mindset of getting comfortable with the uncomfortable. I don’t mean joint pain; I mean a high level of effort.   The more effort you give, the more stimulus we create, and the quicker you become stronger, increase your bone density, increase your function, and all those things we talked about during your consultation. Any questions so far? Does that make sense how we can build strength quickly?
Now let’s go do an upper body exercise.
Pulldown/Overhead (see scripts)
Conclusion of Demo Workout:
That’s what we do on the first day. We pick an upper body and a lower body exercise for you to experience it. Next time you come back we will start to go from machine to machine with virtually no rest in between. We will work the entire body head to toe: upper body, lower body, spine in about 20 to 25 minutes. It’ll be about all you need and about all you can handle at that moment in time. Then we allow 2 to 3 days of rest and recovery because that’s when the body changes and adapts then we bring you back and repeat that process. We find the learning curve is about 5 to 7 sessions regarding breathing, speed, and form. You’ll get better each and every time you come in.
Once you get the initial learning curve down we will break your routine into two separate routines. One day you’ll come in and do one set of exercises and then the other day a completely different set of exercises, but always a total body routine. We’ll then take those two distinct routines and alternate them back-and-forth for a long period of time. I’m talking like 8 to 12 sessions. We have what we call a need for non-variation, meaning we want to work the same motor pattern over and over to get the most of your physiology so you get the most out of your results once you walk out the door.
The beauty is you don’t ever have to worry about program design. That’s our expertise based upon your medical history and goals. The hard part for you, is that  you just have to walk in, move slow, and breathe and we will take care of the rest. any questions on the training protocol?
See how that could build your strength quickly and safely?
-After demo workout review mutual commitments if they did not fill them out online
Review hours of operation. (explain: Once you get a feel for how this fits into your lifestyle we highly recommend a recurring appointment. Two day and times that are on your schedule so we keep you consistent, accountable and get the slots you want. Then if you have conflicts or travel we just move it as we need).
Review price commitments:
Price Commitments
Last but not least, our commitments. This is based on coming twice a week which is what I would prescribe. Our minimum commitment is 48 sessions. If you come consistently for 48 sessions, you’ll use those in about a six month period of time. It’s $70 per session. Therefore it’s six consecutive monthly payments of $560 per month.  Now at the end of the six monthly payments we no longer bill you or auto renew you like most gyms do. You get 30 days at the end to utilize any unused sessions. We know people travel, life happens so we accommodate for life interruptions. Where most gyms say you use them or you lose them. We treat your schedule with respect.
Now the more you commit the more you save and it is substantial. 96 sessions is a 12 month commitment. It’s $60 per session. Therefore $480 per month for 12 months. You get 60 days at the end to utilize any unused sessions for life interruptions. We know the longer clients are with us the better the results they are going to get so we reward them monetarily.
Our biggest commitment is also our biggest savings at 144 sessions with it which is 18 months. The session rate drops all the way down to $54 per session and the monthly installment goes all the way down to only $432 per month. You get an additional 90 days to use any unused sessions for life interruptions.
We take all major credit cards, cash, and checks.  (Point to the bottom sentence, you can pick any package today and within the first 30 great days you can upgrade to any other package or at the time of your renewal.)
Just like a doctor prescribes medication, we prescribe exercise. So based on the goals we discussed today, I would prescribe the middle option as it gives you time to get to those results and a cost savings off the top. (Point to the 48 session column): You could go with the minimum commitment, but it’s the biggest cost per session or (point to the 144 session column) you could go with this option. It’s the biggest commitment, but it is the biggest cost savings.  Again, I’m prescribing the middle level based on your medical history and goals, but ultimately the decision is yours.
So which do you think is best for you?  SHUT UP AND LET THEM SPEAK FIRST!
If they object, offer 2 free sessions to test it out if they’re unsure.
If truly a financial constraint, offer our lowest monthly rate of $432 per month in exchange for our lowest commitment of 6 months. Last option is once a week if it is truly a financial constraint (See objection handling videos and scripts).
Sign them up!
Get them scheduled!
Welcome them to the Family!