Initial Consultation and Articles
Exercise and its Role in Fat Loss
It is beyond the scope of this manual to fully explore the topic of nutrition and weight loss.  However, many clients will find their way to us with the main goal of fat loss.  Therefore, it is important that the instructor understand and be able to communicate the role of exercise in a fat loss program.
Both exercise and food are essential components in either a physical conditioning program or a fat-loss program.  The contributions of each are different though depending on the goal.  Conceptually speaking, the goal of physical conditioning is 80% dependent on exercise and 20% dependent on food.  Conversely, the goal of fat loss is 20% dependent on exercise and 80% dependent on food.  While the percentages are not necessarily exact, the overall principle it represents is correct.
There are six exercise factors that contribute to fat loss effects that are briefly described below.  They are listed in order of importance beginning with the most impactful factor:
1.    Discriminated weight loss - Any proper fat loss program must contain two elements: a moderate reduction in calories below maintenance and an exercise program.  Without a calorie reduction, weight will not be lost.  Without exercise, weight loss from lean body tissue (most notably muscle) will occur.  And the only method by which to force this preservation of muscle tissue is through proper strength training.
2.    Increased basal metabolism -  Muscle tissue is metabolically expensive burning up to 10-15 calories per day for every pound of muscle added.
3.    Improved body shape – For improving a body’s shape, only muscle and fat can be modified.  Most image concerns arise from excess body fat and inadequate muscle.  Muscle is required to maintain firmness, assist with posture, and provide overall shape and support to the skeleton.
4.    Continued preoccupation – simply put if you are involved in an activity or exercise program you are preoccupied from eating for a moment of time.
5.    Depressed appetite – Increased activity, especially intense exercise depresses appetite.  Moderate activity can help as well such as cleaning the house or going for a walk.
6.    Increased caloric expenditure – Exercise does burn calories but not nearly as much as is commonly believed.  In fact, it ranks well below the previous five factors in the impact on fat loss.  It is far more important to raise your basal metabolic rate through proper strength training, restrict your calories, and ensure discriminated weight loss.