Initial Consultation and Articles
Internalization: It's All Inside
Aside from the established rules and criteria for proper exercise execution (see Preliminary Considerations), one of the most important concepts a client needs to master for optimal results from exercise is the idea of willful and volitional internalization.  Most instructors and trainees create the opposite mindset during a workout.
The commonly held belief is that the exercise subject is in direct competition with the equipment being lifted, and that the subject must defeat the equipment.  It’s also what our natural instincts are programmed to do–to resist or fight when physically challenged.  Traditional sports instructors (coaches, trainers, etc.) encourage this behavior by providing direction for an externalized focus and a contrived aggression.
What most fail to realize is that the musculature does not necessarily benefit from this approach.  In order to illustrate this point, one must first remember the primary objective of exercise; to momentarily fatigue the muscular structures of the body deeply enough to create a growth stimulus (i.e. inroad).  The muscles themselves pay no attention to the machine or whether the subject makes the machine move up and down.
Muscles respond to mechanical loading and this happens only if it encounters an appropriate resistance and if the subject wills its contraction to a sufficient depth of inroad.  With this in mind then, consider the following concept:
·       More important than lifting a weight is how you lift it.
·       More important than how you lift a weight is how you attempt to lift it once lifting becomes nearly or totally impossible.
In addition to mechanical loading, the inroading process requires an internalized mindset.  The subject must be able to turn off the surrounding environment and any of the day’s distractions and concentrate.  They must operate with a sense of feel and imagine what the targeted parts of the body are doing.  They must perpetually monitor all of the involved systems while directing their effort toward the end goal of thoroughly inroading the muscles.  This imagery is the basis for proficient motor control and optimized mental control.  It is a requirement to willfully perform productive high-intensity resistance training.
As concentric failure approaches the subject should be focused on the following:
·      Am I feeling the targeted musculature?
·	  Am I controlling my response to what I’m feeling?
·	  Am I concentrating on what I’m doing?
·	  Am I attempting to produce a consistent effort in the proper direction?
[As intensity increases add:]
·       Am I really in command of the effort or simply holding position because of the discomfort?
·       Zero in on the target muscles and embrace the discomfort.
·       Anticipate the urge to lunge or heave and methodically squeeze through this position instead.
·       Increase your respirations to prevent the instinctive Valsalva.
[Once movement ceases add:]
·       Visualize the movement continuing with increased effort even though it is not.
Review the section on momentary muscular failure and thorough inroad technique.  Remember that the purpose of the exercise is to inroad the muscle’s momentary strength as thoroughly and efficiently as possible.  For this reason, it’s in the subject’s best interest to continue their effort beyond momentary muscular failure.  In fact, the most productive part of the set, the most meaningful stimulation, probably occurs after concentric failure.  This is especially true for advanced trainees.
Eventually, the disciplined practice of these internalization techniques will lead to a programmed, trance-like performance of the exercise.  Despite the high level of duress you are experiencing, you will be able to stay focused on the details.  When you learn to embrace the discomfort and actually seek to create it, you will be in complete control of the situation.  But because this goes against our natural inclination to avoid discomfort, this is likely the most difficult exercise concept to learn.
While the above discussion is nowhere near a comprehensive analysis on the topic of internalization, it does serve an informative introduction to those not yet familiar with the concept.  For others that have had exposure to meditation or hypnosis they will find similarities in this practice.  Regardless, one of the unforeseen benefits of this level of deep concentration on exercise at MaxStrength Fitness is the mental clarity and respite that act to provide a “mental break” from other daily pressures.