Abduction - MSF Comprehensive Overview
Target Muscles:
Gluteus Medius (Glutes/Hips) - Hip horizontal Abduction
Synergists:
Gluteus Minimus (Glutes/Hips) - Hip horizontal Abduction
Gluteus Maximus - lateral fibers (Glutes/Hips) - Hip horizontal Abduction
Piriformis - Hip horizontal Abduction
Considerations for setup:
The ABduction machine has a relatively simple set up.  Similar to the ADduction machine, the seat back will most likely be standardized at position 6 or 7.  This setting will allow for a more upright position when seated and is generally viewed as more favorable for our clients.
The main factor to be determined is the setting of the width of the thigh pads, which establishes the starting point and lower turnaround on this exercise, effectively the same as setting a gap.  But there will likely never be a need for a gap on this machine because of the thigh pad adjustment.
Ideally we will look to have the thigh pads as “snug” or close together at the lower turnaround.  We may even “crowd” or compress the subject's soft tissue to some extent to create as full an effective range of motion as possible.
As always, we should be attentive to the client’s level of comfort with any of the settings and if they are compressed too much or have had a history of hip issues, a slightly wider setting may be warranted.
Accordingly, we would expect subjects with larger lower bodies (wider hips/legs) to have a wider pad setting and smaller lower bodies will most likely have narrower settings.
The movement arms will need to be manually opened or pulled apart while the client enters the seat and lifts their legs for loading into the start position.  If the weight is excessive and the movement arms cannot be pulled apart by the instructor, the weight can be set after the client is loaded into the machine.  Just be prepared to assist the movement arms together (fully close them) with the leg so that the weight stack flattens fully and the selector pin can be placed into the weight stack. Take care in this approach as the client will most likely have their legs compressed to some degree.
Posture/Get Set:
Chest up, butt back, seat belt around waist (not on femurs), chin slightly tucked (neutral), feet and ankles relaxed, hands on handles for balance but not anchoring down.
Ideally this exercise will be performed with an anterior pelvic tilt, which is facilitated by the chest up, back arched posture.
Execution, Instruction, and Turnarounds:
LOAD UP:  From the starting position (lower turn), chest up, neutral head position, hands on handles, establish breathing, and gradually begin to apply pressure by driving out through the knees.
Once the instructor has given the cue to begin the load up, there should be a quiet moment where the instructor is intently observing the actions.  If done properly, a simple “good” or “yes, just like that” is an opportunity for positive feedback.
CONCENTRIC/UPPER TURN:  Subject will move through this first concentric phase, lifting their chest, arching their back, and driving their knees apart “as far as they comfortably can” (upper turn).  Once the desired duration is achieved in the contracted position (either brief pause of 1 second or slightly longer squeeze of 2 to 3 seconds), the instructor will click at that exact moment.
ECCENTRIC:  The click is immediately followed with the instruction to “ease out,  do not speed up” or something to that effect.
The instructor then needs to establish the expectation for the first lower turnaround of the set, which on an Abduction will be to “touch and go” or “be continuous” or “seamlessly change directions”.  Remember, there is always a cue to give on the first eccentric of an exercise.
LOWER TURN:  Touch and go at the lower turn as if “seamlessly changing directions without pausing.”
Keep chest up by leveraging off of the handles and the top of the back pad.
One continuous pace with only a “brief but definite” pause of about one second in the contracted position of the first two reps and a squeeze of two to three seconds from the third rep on.  Keep in mind, we cannot simply rely on the cue of ‘squeeze’ in this situation.  That can mean various things to different people.  We need to teach them HOW to squeeze.
Verbiage for the pause/squeeze in the contracted position might be “lift your chest, arch your back, continue to drive out through your knees as if the movement continues…keep breathing, keep still, [click], ease out, don’t speed up” or “keeping your head still, drive your knees apart as hard as you can…there, lock it in place…breathe freely…[click], ease out.”  So during the desired duration of the squeeze in the contracted position, we are providing actionable instruction.
Importantly, the number of reps recorded will only be those that the instructor deems were full reps.  So if the client does not reach full contraction of the upper back, that is not a full rep and will not be recorded in the rep count on the chart.  But due to the nature of certain exercises, and Abduction being one of them, it may make sense to continue the set despite the client no longer achieving full range of motion.  There will still be stimulative tension experienced on the partial reps as long as they are within the client’s exacting control.
The decision to continue a set after reaching concentric failure is highly individual and should be discussed with a studio Leader or with MSF Corporate.  For a brand new client, just completing a handful of full range of motion reps may be enough to introduce the exercise.  So in other words, we may not even take them to concentric failure if they are new to strength training or if they are showing signs of adverse discomfort or losing proper form.  This is a progressive journey.
While we are encouraging the subject to maintain their pace, they should expect to have to increase their effort over the course of a set.  Effort does not remain constant.  In order to maintain a given pace with increasing fatigue, effort needs to voluntarily increase as a counter to the fatigue.  This is how stimulative mechanical tension is created.
NOTES
Be attentive to any pinch points while loading/unloading clients on this machine.  Carefully pull the movement arms apart by grabbing the very end of the padding and slowly return them as the client lifts their legs.  Additionally, watch for the thigh pads themselves as they tilt/rock in place and ensure the client’s hands are clear of them.
As with many exercises, we can expect each client to have varying capabilities in terms of range of motion.  We should encourage as much of a ROM through hip abduction as is permitted.  Additionally, the instructor should use the first 2 or 3 reps to determine what each individual subject’s ROM is and use that to determine encouragement of effort and registering full repetitions.  In cases where ROM appears to be minimal, ensure that it does not result from excessive weight or a lack of understanding how to execute the movement.
While we are encouraging driving out through the knees, the knees may not in fact be in contact with the thigh pads.  This is acceptable though in that to instruct driving out through the femur may be confusing and may not be as simply understood as through the singular point of the knee.  The knee is essentially the end of the femur, which is the lever we are moving with our hip musculature on this exercise.
Many subjects will come to us with hip issues (i.e. replacements) and may or may not be able to tolerate this movement pattern.  While avoiding this exercise altogether would be the most conservative approach overall, we may be able to actually help the client by strengthening the area.  For those with no underlying orthopedic issue, the most conservative approach would be to perform a Timed Static Contraction (TSC).  In this situation, the instructor would pin a heavy enough weight so that the movement arm cannot be moved (i.e. too heavy to actually lift).  Then, with the client properly secured in the seat, the instructor will position the movement arm to some approximate midpoint in the range of motion, maybe slightly biased toward the upper turnaround.  The instructor would then lead the client through an increasing STATIC effort against out into the thigh pads.  This is typically a 50% effort for 30 seconds, a 75% effort for another 30 seconds, and a final 30 seconds at an all out effort, for a total of 90 seconds of continuous effort.  This approach when followed at least weekly for months at a time can build an appreciable level of strength contributing to improved function of the hips.  There also tends to be a carryover effect to what has been estimated at 15 degrees in either direction of the position of the static exercise.  There is also a possibility that the client will be able to one day perform this exercise dynamically and continue to progress.
Importantly, while learning the Continuous Tension protocol, the subject will most likely be using a relatively light weight and as a result will probably be capable of performing a higher number of reps, spending more time on the machine.  While this may seem conducive to learning, it can also be counterproductive from a discomfort standpoint.  Yes, a big part of the learning curve is to be able to produce an effort while managing discomfort, but there can be diminishing returns in that the movement becomes intolerable before it is stimulative.  Ideally we should be striving for perfect form with “faster” reps (i.e. 6 second positive, 6 second negative) and a “heavier” weight that leads to failure in 10 or fewer reps.  While this may not be achievable or advisable in the initial sessions, as long as the subject is demonstrating a clear understanding of the control required, we may progress the intensity more quickly.