Biceps Curl - MSF Comprehensive Overview
Target Muscles:
Biceps Brachii (Biceps) - Elbow Flexion
Synergists:
Wrist Flexors - (Forearms) - Wrist stabilizer
Considerations for setup:
The primary consideration for this exercise will be the seat height.  In most cases there will be a gap required depending on the location of the movement arm at rest relative to the client’s proportions and tolerance at the lower turnaround.
A standard gap of one or two will likely be required for the introduction of this exercise until the instructor can assess strength and tolerance at elbow extension.
While our Continuous Tension protocol has been developed with safety as the primary goal, there are certain exercises that carry more potential risk than others and the biceps curl is one of them.  In particular it is the loading of the elbow joint in the stretched or extended position.  For this reason we will use a gap at least when introducing this exercise.
Determine the seat height by first taking into account the height of the subject.  Taller subjects will most likely have a lower seat, shorter subjects will have a higher seat.
Similar to the Triceps Extension, as a rotary movement, the Biceps Curl has a single axis of rotation and in theory, this axis is to be aligned with the axis of rotation of the body, the elbow joint.  But because of differences in individual humerus lengths, there will be instances where direct alignment is not possible.  As long as we can get close, there should be no negative impact on the safety or effectiveness of the exercise.
And just like the Triceps Extension, the proper seat height will allow the upper arm of the subject to lay flush along the pad.  The subject should be sitting upright with their chest against the pad and their arms will lay over the pad  out in front of them.  Ideally, the elbow crease will point more toward the ceiling than in towards each other.  This requires a slight external rotation of the humeri.
If the seat were set too high, the upper arm would hover above the pad and the elbow would be the only point of the arm that made contact with the pad.  Remember, the entire length of the upper arm (humerus) should lay along and make contact with the pad.  If the seat were set too low, the elbow would not be able to make contact with the pad and the upper arm would rest at the peak of the bend in the pad.  If the client mentions an uncomfortable pressure in the back of the arm (triceps) while performing the exercise, there is a good chance the seat is set too low.
Posture/Get Set:
This exercise utilizes a chest up posture while leaning into the chest pad.  The arms will be outstretched over the top of the pad with the crease of the elbows pointing toward the ceiling.  With the arms in this position, the instructor will lift the handle up from the resting position to remove any slack created by the belt and the kevlar belt.  This will be the starting point and the lower turnaround.
The subject should reach for the handle and grab each side, palms up, equidistant from the center.  One should always consider the required posture and the details of the load up as an integral component of the exercise itself.
To begin the movement, the instructor will maintain the starting position of the movement arm with an open hand and remind the client that “the exercise will begin from this position”.
Feet should be flat on the floor or alternatively if the subject has shorter legs with a higher seat, they can rest their feet back on the floor on the toes of the shoes.
Execution, Instruction, and Turnarounds:
LOAD UP:  From the starting position (lower turn), chest up, neutral head position, face relaxed…establish breathing and gradually begin to apply pressure by driving the elbows down into the pad while simultaneously pulling up against the handles with just enough effort to begin moving.  Keep in mind when a client properly performs a gradual load up, they will need to slightly speed up to stay smooth.
Once the instructor has given the cue to begin the load up, there should be a quiet moment where the instructor is intently observing the actions.  If done properly, a simple “mmm…hmm…” or “yes, just like that” is an opportunity for positive feedback.
CONCENTRIC/UPPER TURN:  Subject will move through this first concentric phase maintaining a smooth pace, keeping their posture, and attempting to flex/close the elbow joints as tightly as they can (upper turn).  It is important to note that most subjects will assume they are to pull the handles up as far as they possibly can.  Not only will this lead to an unloading of the targeted muscles, but there will be an increased risk of bringing the movement arm up close to the face.  The instructor must be certain to communicate the difference between loading and contracting the muscle and simply just moving the machine through space.
One continuous pace with only a “brief but definite” pause of about one second in the contracted position of the first two reps and a squeeze of two to three seconds from the third rep on.  Keep in mind, we cannot simply rely on the cue of ‘squeeze’ in this situation.  That can mean various things to different people.  We need to teach them HOW to squeeze.
Verbiage for the pause/squeeze in the contracted position might be “continue to tighten your elbow joint as hard as you can…keep breathing, keep still, [click], ease out, don’t speed up” or “keeping your head still, clamp your elbow joints tight…there, lock it in place, [click], ease out.”  So during the desired duration of the squeeze in the contracted position, we are providing actionable instruction.
ECCENTRIC:  The click is immediately followed with the instruction to “ease out,  do not speed up” or something to that effect.
The instructor then needs to establish the expectation for the first lower turnaround of the set, which on the Biceps Curl will be to “touch and go” or “be continuous” or “seamlessly change directions”.  Remember, there is always a cue to give on the first eccentric of an exercise.
LOWER TURN:  Touch and go at the lower turn as if “continuously passing through the bottom.”
The instructor needs to stay attentive at this change of direction to make sure it is entirely within the client’s control.  As mentioned above, there is an element of risk in this position that makes the elbow somewhat vulnerable under load.  This will be mitigated with use of a gap as well as repeated practice and strengthening on this exercise.
Keep the chest up and the elbows firmly leveraged into the pad.
INTENSITY: By definition, the set will end when concentric failure is reached (i.e. subject can no longer reach the initially attained degree of elbow flexion with perfect form).  This is where we would note the reps and record only the full reps achieved on the chart.  But as discussed throughout the Academy, certain exercises lend themselves to performing additional, partial repetitions.  So even though the subject cannot fully flex the elbow, there may be a substantial amount of strength remaining.  Especially when they are able to perform those partial reps beyond the midpoint and with perfect form.
Of even more importance for the consideration of training beyond concentric failure (i.e. using partial repetitions) would be the experience and tolerance level of the individual.  A newer, more deconditioned client would not yet be ready for this more advanced technique.  They can simply perform full repetitions to a point where they begin to fatigue and the effort will probably be enough to provide the desired stimulus.  Of course we are always attempting to progress every client’s understanding of effort and intensity while improving their quality from session to session as is illustrated in the point below.
While we are encouraging the subject to maintain their pace, they should expect to have to increase their effort over the course of a set.  Effort does not remain constant.  In order to maintain a given pace with increasing fatigue, effort needs to voluntarily increase as a counter to the fatigue.  This is how stimulative mechanical tension is created.
NOTES
The trainer will click only after they have visually confirmed that the desirable range of motion has been achieved and the movement has temporarily ceased (i.e. no further contraction of the biceps is possible).  The instructor needs to be attentive to the likelihood that the client will assume that the movement should continue until they hear the click.  But the opposite is true.  The [click] will ONLY come when the proper range of motion has been achieved and the client has established control (brief pause in contracted position).  So these two objectives are at odds and the instructor needs to anticipate and be assertive to control the outcome.  This will be yet another example of how the trainer cares more about the workout than the client does.
There is typically a one or a two gap that will be used on this exercise, at least during the introduction.  If certain subjects show a level of strength and control, we may reduce the gap or eliminate it altogether.  Keep in mind that a longer range of motion and a deeper stretch are not necessarily better.  This will be highly individual and should be taken on a case by case basis.  But there is some benefit to loading certain muscles while they are being lengthened.  As long as the stretch is not excessive, and there is still some degree of elbow bend at the lower turnaround, certain subjects will be able to utilize the full range of motion.
This exercise may be performed isometrically for individuals with an injury such as tennis or golfers elbow. (Static Hold or Timed Static Contraction).  As with all static holds, the instructor will assist the subject to the position in which the exercise will be performed and will take the movement arm back to the resting position when finished.  See the section on Static Holds and Timed Static Contractions for more details on the setup and execution.
Importantly, while learning the Continuous Tension protocol, the subject will most likely be using a relatively light weight and as a result will probably be capable of performing a higher number of reps, spending more time on the machine.  While this may seem conducive to learning, it can also be counterproductive from a discomfort standpoint.  Yes a big part of the learning curve is to be able to produce an effort while managing discomfort, but there can be diminishing returns in that the movement becomes intolerable before it is stimulative.  Ideally we should be striving for perfect form with “faster” reps (i.e. 6 second positive, 6 second negative) and a “heavier” weight that leads to failure in 10 or fewer reps.  While this may not be achievable or advisable in the initial sessions, as long as the subject is demonstrating a clear understanding of the control required, we may progress the intensity more quickly.
Among the biggest discrepancies to be expected on this machine will be to lift the upper arms and elbows off the pad, even subtly, to be able to pull the movement arm up further.  In conjunction with this, there will be a tendency to curl or flex the wrists to move the handles further.  But this again falls under the assumed objective of exercise, which is to keep the movement arm moving or to move it further.  The instructor must continually watch for these tendencies and remind the client of the real objective; to create as much tension in the targeted muscle fibers as possible at that moment.  By lifting the arms off the pad, we unload the biceps and outsource the effort to other muscles.  This concept will most likely be the most challenging one to convince clients of and the most important.