Chest Flye - MSF Comprehensive Overview
Target Muscles:
Pectoralis Major (Chest/Pecs) - Shoulder horizontal Adduction
Synergists:
Anterior Deltoid (Shoulder) - Shoulder horizontal Adduction
Considerations for setup:
There are several considerations when establishing the settings for a client on the Chest Flye, along with the need to satisfy Theoretical versus Practical alignment.
Determine the seat height by first taking into account the height of the subject.  Taller subjects will most likely have a lower seat, shorter subjects will have a higher seat.
The seat will need to be fine tuned so that the upper arm (humerus) is sloped down slightly from the shoulder to the elbow, or at least level to the floor, when in the starting position.  So the humeral head in the shoulder joint would be slightly higher than the elbow, or level, when the hands are on the handles.
Additionally, the top of the head will end up near the padded “work box” overhead when seated.
The theoretical alignment in this case would have the subject’s shoulders directly under the axes of rotation of the machine, which is determined by the back pad.  However, what tends to be more important is the resulting location of the elbows/humerus on the roller pads and the need for a sufficient amount of space between the roller pads and the subject in the contracted position.  This is the practical alignment that will govern the most optimal settings.
Accordingly, we would expect subjects with longer arms to have the back pad set further back, away from the roller pads.  And subjects with shorter arms would have the back pad set in closer to the roller pads.  But the following point must also be taken into consideration.
As a result of the need to satisfy the practical alignment, look to position the back pad so that when sitting upright with arms out to the sides and hands on the handles, the elbow will land beyond the roller pad.  And more importantly, the elbow will remain in a position beyond the roller pad throughout the full ROM.  If the back pad is too far back, the elbow (i.e. humerus) may not stay in contact with roller pads during the movement.  Alternatively, if the back pad is too far forward, the roller pads may run into the client as they perform the movement.
Importantly, given the juxtaposed situations outlined in the two points above, we need to consider the interplay of arm length AND torso size to find the optimal back pad setting.
Once the seat and chest pad are set, we will need to consider a gap to create a more conservative stretch at the starting point/lower turnaround.  Most subjects will benefit by starting the movement with the elbow slightly behind the midline of the torso when viewed from the side (frontal plane).  This will provide a slight stretch for most.  A subject with shoulder issues will warrant a more conservative approach and should most likely have a larger gap, resulting in a reduced stretch.  As always, tolerance should be assessed on an individual basis.
Posture/Get Set:
Chest up, butt back, feet on stool, chin slightly tucked (neutral), arms behind the roller pads with hands on handles.
Execution, Instruction, and Turnarounds:
LOAD UP:  From the starting position (lower turn), keeping chest up, neutral head position, arms in place, establish breathing, and gradually begin to apply pressure by driving forward through the elbows.
Once the instructor has given the cue to begin the load up, there should be a quiet moment where the instructor is intently observing the actions.  If done properly, a simple “mmm, hmm” or “yes, just like that” is an opportunity for positive feedback.
CONCENTRIC/UPPER TURN:  Subject will move through this first concentric phase, maintaining a chest up posture and driving the elbows together until the roller pads make contact (upper turn).  Once the desired duration is achieved in the contracted position (either brief pause of 1 second or slightly longer squeeze of 2 to 3 seconds), the instructor will “click” to begin the eccentric.
ECCENTRIC:  The click is immediately followed with the instruction to “ease out, keep that pace” or something to that effect.
LOWER TURN: Now that the client is in the first eccentric phase of the set, the instructor must inform the client of what will constitute the lower turnaround and what the client is expected to do there.  In this case the client will “touch and go” or “be continuous at the bottom” or “barely touch, barely start” or “seamlessly change direction as the weights touch” or “soft touch, do not pause.”  All of those cues require the client to control their pace and increase their focus as they sense for the exact moment the weights touch.  Again, this creates a level of safety we require with our Continuous Tension protocol.  Remember, there is always a cue to give on the first eccentric of an exercise.
One continuous pace with only a “brief but definite” pause of about one second in the contracted position of the first two reps and a squeeze of two to three seconds from the third rep on.  Keep in mind, we cannot simply rely on the cue of ‘squeeze’ in this situation.  That can mean various things to different people.  We need to teach them HOW to squeeze.
Verbiage for the pause/squeeze in the contracted position for the Chest Flye might be “keep your chest up and gently bring those pads together…now keep breathing and continue to drive through your elbows, attempting to further dent those pads…keep still…[click], ease out…don’t speed up.”  So during the desired duration of the squeeze, we are providing actionable instruction.
Maintain posture, head position, pace, and contact with the arm pads.
Importantly, the number of reps recorded will only be those that the instructor deems were full reps.  So if the client does not reach full contraction of the chest, that is not a full rep and will not be recorded in the rep count on the chart.  But due to the nature of certain exercises, and Chest Flye being one of them, it may make sense to continue the set despite the client no longer achieving full range of motion (see point below).  There will still be stimulative tension experienced on the partial reps as long as they are within the client’s exacting control.
The decision to continue a set after reaching concentric failure is highly individual and should be discussed with a studio Leader or with MSF Corporate.  For a brand new client, just completing a handful of full range of motion reps may be enough to introduce the exercise.  So in other words, we may not even take them to concentric failure if they are new to strength training or if they are showing signs of adverse discomfort or losing proper form.  This is a progressive journey.
While we are encouraging the subject to maintain their pace, they should expect to have to increase their effort over the course of a set.  Effort does not remain constant.  In order to maintain a given pace with increasing fatigue, effort needs to voluntarily increase as a counter to the fatigue.  This is how stimulative mechanical tension is created.
NOTES
Be prepared to point out the overhead mechanism on the machine upon every entry/exit, regardless of how many times a subject has used the machine.  A simple “watch your head” while pointing out the padded component is required to ensure the subject’s safety.
In the event that the subject has shorter arms and cannot reach the handles without placing the humerus in an upward angle from shoulder to elbow, we should consider an alternate hand position.  Rather than using the handles and creating a less than optimal positioning, have the subject simply wrap their hands around the top of the roller pads.
The Chest Flye works well in situations where a client may be experiencing elbow, hand, or wrist issues but we still wish to train the chest muscles.  It also works well as a supplement to a program for someone wishing to focus on chest development.  In this case, it can be programmed with an overhead press on one routine that alternates with a chest press on the other routine.  This way, the chest is being stimulated twice per week.
Importantly, while learning the Continuous Tension protocol, the subject will most likely be using a relatively light weight and as a result will probably be capable of performing a higher number of reps, spending more time on the machine.  While this may seem conducive to learning, it can also be counterproductive from a discomfort standpoint.  Yes a big part of the learning curve is to be able to produce an effort while managing discomfort, but there can be diminishing returns in that the movement becomes intolerable before it is stimulative.  Ideally we should be striving for perfect form with “faster” reps (i.e. 6 second positive, 6 second negative) and a “heavier” weight that leads to failure in 10 or fewer reps.  While this may not be achievable or advisable in the initial sessions, as long as the subject is demonstrating a clear understanding of the control required, we may progress the intensity more quickly.