Lumbar Extension (Lower Back) - MSF Comprehensive Overview
Target Muscles:
Erector Spinae (Spinal Erectors/Spinal Extensors) - Spinal Extension/Anterior Pelvic Tilt
Multifidus - Spinal Extension/Spinal stability
Quadratus Lumborum (QL’s) - Spinal Extension/Anterior Pelvic Tilt
Synergists:
Gluteus Maximus (Rear end/buttocks) - stabilizer
Latissimus Dorsi (Lats) - Spinal Extension
Trapezius (Upper Back) -  stabilizer - Scapular Retraction /Adduction and downward Rotation
Considerations for setup:
If the accessory weight stack has weight that either needs to be cleared or set, that must be done prior to having the client sit.  Once the accessory stack is set, the instructor will move the movement arm (carriage) of the machine all the way back and place the selector pin into the main stack to lock the movement arm in place.
Determine height of the seat pad, by approximating the iliac crest of the subject with the level of the roller pad at the back of the seat.  This is the theoretical alignment for this exercise.  In theory, this will optimally align the axis of rotation of the machine with the axis of rotation of the body, the top of the pelvis.  See the following point for the practical alignment considerations.
From a practical standpoint, the instructor should still take into consideration the length of the spine and/or the relative size of the hip girdle and surrounding tissues.  In either case, there is a possibility where there will be a substantial shift in the center of gravity, giving the subject more mass above the movement arm of the machine.  They become more “top heavy” in a sense.  This will create additional leverage that does not come from the targeted musculature and can lead to a false sense of progression.  As a result, there is a likelihood that the subject will require more weight, simultaneously making the exercise less effective with more risk.
With this practical consideration in mind, have the subject sit upright in the seat while moving the back pad (movement arm) up against the upper back.  The pad should make contact with a majority of the shoulder blade area.
If the back pad is under the shoulder blades, the seat is too high.
If the back pad is near or making contact with the cervical spine, the seat is too low.
Both the theoretical and practical alignment considerations should be used in setting the seat.
The next consideration is the footplate setting.  In order to move the footplate closer to the subject, the femur restraint (knee pad) must first be raised and moved in to approximate the position over the knees.  This will allow room for the footplate to be moved into the desired position.
Once the feet are on the footplate, it is best to fasten the seatbelt across the crease of the hip.  If the seatbelt is applied before the feet are up, there may be difficulty in lifting the legs.  And if the seatbelt is applied after the footplate and femur restraint have been set, there may be too much abdominal congestion for proper placement.
The footplate should be located so that when the feet are placed on the platform the knee joint is slightly higher than the hip joint, resulting in a slight downward angle of the femur toward the subject.  (NOTE: In many cases it helps to picture the bones of the subject when aligning rather than just the limb in its entirety.  This is one such example where the instructor should try and estimate the position of the femur itself when evaluating the relationship of the knee height to the hip).
With the footplate setting established, the femur restraint should be positioned and tightened down so that the pads basically straddle the knees evenly (i.e. the patella should be approximately centered in the opening between the two pad, with one pad sitting above the knee on the femur and the other resting below the knee along the tibia).
The pads should be snug enough to allow a little bit of wiggle room against the leg but not enough that there is a space or gap.  Additionally, the angle of the pads, which is fixed, should be as congruent as possible to the angle of the knee in order to create a secure lock.
If the pads of the femur restraint are not at least close to congruent to the knee angle, then the placement of the foot on the footplate needs to be adjusted.  Oftentimes the knee angle is too severe and will need to be opened.  For most, this means they will probably have to raise the foot closer to the top of the footplate.  Keep in mind this may affect the knee height/femur slope so the footplate may have to be adjusted as well.
With the lower body secure, the next step will be to determine the lower turnaround (and starting point) for the exercise.  The instructor will grab the movement arm and remove the main stack selector pin and carefully pull the movement arm (and the client) forward into the desired flexion.
Ideally there will be a standardized gap for the lower turnaround for most subjects.  But as noted above, there needs to be a consideration made for the size and tolerance of each individual.  A larger subject or one with a history of low back issues will likely have a larger gap resulting in less flexion at the lower turnaround.
There should always be a conservative approach to setting the lower turnaround on the lumbar exercise and this setting should be made with an abundance of caution.  There is an increased risk with this movement pattern especially when under load in spinal flexion.  Additionally, most of the benefits are attributable to the extension pattern of the movement.
Once the subject has been brought to the starting point, there may have been some shifting back in the seat that would require an adjustment of the femur pads by giving an additional crank to make snug again.
Posture/Get Set:
The cue to begin the lumbar exercise would be something to the effect of, “chin tucked, chest up, establish your breathing and gradually begin to build pressure into the back pad by lifting the ribcage.”
Instinctively, there will likely be an urge to lift the chin and throw the head back along with a valsalva breath hold timed with sudden application of force.  Our instruction should prevent this.  Give the instruction slowly, directly, and clearly so that it may be processed and implemented.
Execution, Instruction, and Turnarounds:
LOAD UP: Once the instructor has given the cue to begin the gradual load up, there should be a quiet moment where the instructor is intently observing the actions.  If done properly, a simple “perfect” or “yes, just like that” is an opportunity for positive feedback.
Even if the client has properly prevented lifting the chin on the load up, there will still tend to be an urge to throw the head back in the contracted/extended position.  This poses a risk to the neck and contributes to the extension effort creating a false sense of progress.  In other words, the weight of the head makes it easier to reach the end stop, taking away from the desired work of the lumbar muscles.
The trainer should also be attentive to the possibility of an emphasized leg drive under loose pads or in situations where the knees are NOT higher than the hips.  This is an incorrect setting and should be reevaluated.  In this case, the movement then becomes more of a hip extension than a true lumbar extension.
CONCENTRIC: As the client makes their way through the concentric portion of the first rep, it is helpful to describe the anatomical action that is expected.  Something along the lines of “chest up, back arched…” or “lift your chest and arch your back” seem to work well here.  Also note, that these two cues essentially accomplish the same thing, spinal extension.  But the different phrasing may resonate more clearly for some so this is our attempt to be descriptive while keeping our language simple.  Most clients will NOT know how to “extend their spine” or how to “squeeze” their lower back.
UPPER TURN: As the subject approaches the upper turnaround (end stop), the instructor should watch intently to assess their range of motion and tolerance of the extension pattern.   If the subject can tolerate the full extension permitted by the machine the instructor should ensure that the full range of motion has in fact been achieved.  This will allow for more accurate record keeping and a more conservative progression.
At the instance the subject reaches the end stop there should be a brief pause in the contracted position (and a 2 to 3 second “squeeze” from the third rep on).  This is unlike our compound pushing movements (LP, CP, OH, SD) where the upper turnaround is met with continuous change of direction into the eccentric phase.  This brief pause and slightly longer squeeze require an additional level of focus and control, making the movement safer.  They also afford the subject an opportunity to “feel” the target muscles.
Verbiage on a squeeze might be “keep arching, keep breathing, [click], ease out.”  Keep in mind we need to teach the client HOW to squeeze.  Saying “squeeze” alone is not a useful instruction.  The MSF Exercise Practitioner is constantly teaching!
ECCENTRIC: Once the desired duration is achieved in the contracted position (either brief pause of 1 second or slightly longer squeeze of 2 to 3 seconds), the instructor will click at that exact moment.  The click is immediately followed with the instruction to “ease out, and do not speed up” or something to that effect.  This is the first repetition and the instructor is setting expectations for the entire set.
LOWER TURN: Now that the client is in the first eccentric phase of the set, the instructor must inform the client of what will constitute the lower turnaround and what the client is expected to do there.  In this case the client will “touch and go” or “be continuous at the bottom” or “barely touch, barely start” or “seamlessly change direction as the weights touch” or “soft touch, do not pause.”  All of those cues require the client to control their pace and increase their focus as they sense for the exact moment the weights touch.  Again, this creates a level of safety we require with our Continuous Tension protocol.  Remember there is always a cue to give on the first eccentric of an exercise.
Because of the series of restraints on this exercise (seat belt, femur restraint, movement arm), control of the posture and path are essentially forced.  Reminders to control the head position and to arch the back are helpful but otherwise those 2 P’s are accounted for.  The most important reminder here will be to maintain a controlled pace.
And while we are encouraging the subject to maintain their pace, they should expect to have to increase their effort over the course of a set.  Effort does not remain constant.  In order to maintain a given pace with increasing fatigue, effort needs to voluntarily increase as a counter to the fatigue.  This is how stimulative mechanical tension is created.
But of paramount importance is the fact that the lumbar exercise should NEVER be taken to failure.  There is a greater likelihood that the subject will change their behavior/execution as a result of the increasing perceived exertion.  Stay within the tolerable limit of each individual client, making sure that every rep is able to be completed with exacting control.
NOTES
It is our company policy that we ascertain any and all limitations and/or contraindications to resistance training for all of our clients and determine which movement patterns these may affect.  This is one of the primary purposes of having the prospective client complete the consultation paperwork.  It is also a primary purpose of the consultation itself, to understand the limitations of each individual and to tailor the workouts accordingly.  There will be certain subjects that do not tolerate lumbar extension from an orthopedic standpoint.  For these individuals it may make sense to omit the lumbar movement pattern altogether until they have medical clearance or a better understanding of the diagnosis if they do not already have one.
While avoiding the movement pattern altogether would be the most conservative approach overall, we may be able to actually help the client by strengthening the area.  For those with no underlying orthopedic issue, the most conservative approach would be to perform a Timed Static Contraction (TSC).  In this situation, the instructor would pin a heavy enough weight so that the movement arm cannot be moved (i.e. too heavy to actually lift).  Then, with the client properly secured in the seat, the instructor will position the movement arm to some approximate midpoint in the range of motion, maybe slightly biased toward the upper turnaround.  The instructor would then lead the client through an increasing STATIC effort against the back pad.  This is typically a 50% effort for 30 seconds, a 75% effort for another 30 seconds, and a final 30 seconds at an all out effort, for a total of 90 seconds of continuous effort.  This approach when followed at least weekly for months at a time can build an appreciable level of strength contributing to improved function of the lower back muscles.  There also tends to be a carryover effect to what has been estimated at 15 degrees in either direction of the position of the static exercise.  There is also a possibility that the client will be able to one day perform the lumbar exercise dynamically and continue to progress.
In the course of regular use of the Lumbar Extension machine, the instructor may observe what appears to be inconsistency in a client’s performance.  This can certainly happen on any exercise and tends to be encountered more frequently for those that are less coordinated or more intensity adverse.  But for the Lumbar Extension specifically, this can be due in part to the variability in the setup.  The instructor should be attentive to the idea that slight differences in the footplate location, tightness of the femur restraint, and tightness of the seat belt can all contribute to making the exercise harder or easier.   In some instances the client may not be able to achieve a full range of motion with a weight that they have been able to in previous workouts.  Just be aware that the variation in setup can be a reason and that the instructor should strive to be as consistent as possible.
There will also be instances when the subject finds the pressure from the roller pad at the pack of the seat uncomfortable.  In this case there are a few things to consider.  The first would be to check and see if the subject is wearing a belt, which can cause additional pressure.  Or having the knee too high relative to the hip will create more of a horizontal force pushing the femur back into the hip, which is then pushed back into the roller.  So consider letting the footplate out slightly to lower the knee.  The last consideration would be to either raise or lower the seat to change the contact point of the roller pad on the body.  This is another example of practical alignment.  Any “fine tuning” necessary to make the movement tolerable for the client needs to be documented in the settings on the chart so that we may be consistent going forward.