Pullover - MSF Comprehensive Overview
Target Muscles:
Latissimus Dorsi (Lats) - Shoulder Extension
Synergists:
Teres Major (Upper Back) - Shoulder Extension
Posterior Deltoid (Rear Delt) - Shoulder Extension
Rhomboids (Upper Back) - Scapular downward Rotation w/ Adduction
Trapezius (Upper Back) - Scapular Adduction w/ Depression
Pectoralis Major (Chest) - Shoulder Extension
Triceps Brachii (Triceps - long head) - Shoulder Extension
Rectus Abdominis - (Abdominals) - Thorax stabilizer
Considerations for setup:
There are several considerations when establishing the settings for a client on the Pullover, along with the need to satisfy Theoretical versus Practical alignment.
The seat back has two options, up and back or down and forward.  Most clients will need the extra space afforded by the up and back position.  Smaller framed individuals may benefit from having the backpad in the forward position but this will likely only be a handful of clients.
Determine the seat height by first taking into account the height of the subject.  Taller subjects will most likely have a lower seat, shorter subjects will have a higher seat.
As a rotary movement, the Pullover has a single axis of rotation and in theory, this axis is to be aligned with the axis of rotation of the body, the shoulder joint.  But because the shoulder joint will naturally travel or move off of its axis during this movement (and most movements) we will need to consider the approximate middle position of the joint’s excursion to achieve the best fit.
This will entail starting with a seat height that has the axis of rotation of the machine slightly above the center of the shoulder joint while client is seated with arms at their sides.
The next consideration is the position of the arm pads which have an option for wide (W), middle (M), or narrow (N) settings.  Most clients will likely have the pads in the middle setting.  This will be based on the width of the client's shoulders and torso.  Ideally the upper arms should travel as close to the sides of the torso as possible as this will create the best leverage for the lats.  Keep in mind that the narrower the setting, the more care must be given when bringing the movement arm down into place as the client will have to maneuver themselves between the pads.
The lower turnaround will be set with a gap, which for most clients can be standardized at 6.  The instructor will still evaluate this ROM for every single client as safety has to be the priority.  If after handing off the movement arm to perform the eccentric of the first rep, the instructor anticipates that the ROM will be excessive, the instructor should take control of the movement arm and reassess.
With the settings established, the instructor still needs to consider the practical alignment that allows the elbow to “land” at least halfway down along the arm pads.  Additionally the elbow should be bent at around 90 degrees and should be able to stay in that same position throughout the full range of motion of the exercise without any sliding of the upper arm along the pads.  If there is sliding or the elbows are forced to bend or straighten more, then a further adjustment is required.
Posture/Get Set:
This exercise utilizes a PPT which requires a contracted abdomen that leads to a rounded back posture.  Most subjects will instinctively sit with their chest up and back arched.  Clients will also instinctively push down on the movement arm with their hands/arms.  Neither of these instinctive measures are correct, however, and care should be taken to explain the posterior pelvic tilt and the purpose of the elbow pads over using the hands.  One should always consider the required posture and the details of the execution as an integral component of the exercise itself.
The trainer will methodically pull the movement arm down, over top of the client, into the contracted position.  Attentive care must be given to ensure that the client can maneuver their arms between the elbow pads as those are set as narrow as possible to approximate the sides of the ribcage.
It is also advisable for the instructor to grab the movement arm further out/up from the axis so they can better leverage their strength to gain control.
The trainer will then gradually transfer the weight to the client (i.e. handoff) while giving the verbal indicator “driving back through your elbow, tighten your abdomen, that…is…yours,” or something to that effect.  The client needs to briefly keep the movement arm still to establish control before beginning the eccentric.  If there is movement during the handoff the trainer should not yet fully transfer the load.  Instruct the client to “increase your force” or “push harder.”
Execution, Instruction, and Turnarounds:
The movement requires an instructor assist as the set will start in the contracted position (upper turn).  The PPT and effort through the elbows while contracting will remind them of the feeling we are seeking.  After a proper handoff, the instructor will cue the client to “slowly begin to allow the movement arm to rise…keeping the pressure through the elbows.”  Remember there is always a cue to give on the first eccentric of every exercise.
Once the movement arm is raised far enough (weight is being lowered), they will “continuously” or “seamlessly” or “immediately” touch and go by tightening the abdomen, leveraging through the seat belt, and driving through the elbows.  (Importantly, ‘immediate’ means right away, but does not mean suddenly in this case).
The upper turnaround (squeeze) will be when the subject has fully contracted their lats by drawing the elbows down into the sides of the torso and tightening the midsection.
Most subjects will assume that they should push the movement arm down/back as far as they can to lift the weights higher.  The instructor should remind them of the real objective to focus on the optimal range of motion for the muscles being targeted.
The trainer will click only after they have visually confirmed that the desirable range of motion has been achieved and the movement has temporarily ceased (i.e. no further contraction of the lats is possible).  The instructor needs to be attentive to the likelihood that the client will assume that the movement should continue until they hear the click.  But the opposite is true.  The click will ONLY come when the proper range of motion has been achieved and the client has established control (brief pause in contracted position).  So these two objectives are at odds and the instructor needs to anticipate and be assertive to control the outcome.  This will be yet another example of how the trainer cares more about the workout than the client does.
Verbiage used on the concentric might be to “draw the elbows down into the ribs.”
Important to note here, this is one of the few exercises where the posture changes between rep phases.  In the eccentric, as the arms are raising, the ribcage will naturally rise into an anterior pelvic tilt.  On the concentric, the abdomen will tighten, which will draw the ribcage down.
INTENSITY: By definition, the set will end when concentric failure is reached (i.e. subject can no longer lift the weight with perfect form).  This is where we would note the reps and record only the full reps achieved on the chart.  But as discussed throughout the Academy, certain exercises lend themselves to performing additional, partial repetitions and the Pullover is one of these movements.  Especially when the client is able to perform those partial reps beyond the midpoint and with perfect form.  Of even more importance for the consideration of training beyond concentric failure (i.e. using partial repetitions) would be the experience and tolerance level of the individual.  A newer, more deconditioned client would not yet be ready for this more advanced technique.  They can simply perform full repetitions to a point where they begin to fatigue and the effort will probably be enough to provide the desired stimulus.  Of course we are always attempting to progress every client’s understanding of effort and intensity while improving their quality from session to session as is illustrated in the point below.
While we are encouraging the subject to maintain their pace, they should expect to have to increase their effort over the course of a set.  Effort does not remain constant.  In order to maintain a given pace with increasing fatigue, effort needs to voluntarily increase as a counter to the fatigue.  This is how stimulative mechanical tension is created.
NOTES
There is typically a standard gap of 6 to establish a conservative lower turnaround so as not to exceed a client’s ROM or shoulder mobility in the stretched position.  Due to potential variability in the manufacturing and/or installation processes, the standard gap on this exercise should be determined specifically for each individual machine.  This is covered as part of the normal onboarding process but is emphasized here as another measure of safety.
In the event that clients are resting in the contracted position, the trainer may choose to use a selector pin to create an end stop near the upper turnaround, which will give a concentric termination point for the client to increase their effort against.
This exercise may be performed isometrically for safety or education purposes (Static Hold or Timed Static Contraction).
The Pullover works almost every muscle in the upper body and when performed properly can be one of the most physically demanding exercises in the studio.
Importantly, while learning the Continuous Tension protocol, the subject will most likely be using a relatively light weight and as a result will probably be capable of performing a higher number of reps, spending more time on the machine.  While this may seem conducive to learning, it can also be counterproductive from a discomfort standpoint.  Yes a big part of the learning curve is to be able to produce an effort while managing discomfort, but there can be diminishing returns in that the movement becomes intolerable before it is stimulative.  Ideally we should be striving for perfect form with “faster” reps (i.e. 6 second positive, 6 second negative) and a “heavier” weight that leads to failure in 10 or fewer reps.  While this may not be achievable or advisable in the initial sessions, as long as the subject is demonstrating a clear understanding of the control required, we may progress the intensity more quickly.