Simple Row - MSF Comprehensive Overview
Target Muscles:
Posterior Deltoid (Rear Delt) - Shoulder horizontal Abduction
Rhomboids (Upper Back) - Scapular Retraction/Adduction and downward Rotation
Trapezius (Upper Back) - Scapular Retraction/Adduction and downward Rotation
Synergists:
Infraspinatus (Rotator Cuff) - Shoulder horizontal Abduction
Erector Spinae (Spinal Erectors) - stabilizers - Spinal Extension/Anterior Pelvic Tilt (chest up posture)
Considerations for setup:
There are several considerations when establishing the settings for a client on the Simple Row, along with the need to satisfy Theoretical versus Practical alignment.
Determine the seat height by first taking into account the height of the subject.  Taller subjects will most likely have a lower seat, shorter subjects will have a higher seat.  The seat will need to be fine tuned so that the upper arm (humerus) is sloped down slightly from the shoulder to the elbow, when in the starting position.  So the humeral head in the shoulder joint would be slightly higher than the elbow.  Additionally, the top of the head will end up near the padded “work box” overhead when seated.
The theoretical alignment in this case would have the subject’s shoulders directly under the axes of rotation of the machine.  However, what tends to be more important is the resulting location of the elbows in the arm pads and the ability for the pads to stay flush/congruent to the subject’s arms during the execution of the movement.  This is the practical alignment that will govern the most optimal settings.
As a result of the need to satisfy the practical alignment, look to position the chest pad so that when sitting upright with arms out in front the elbow will land in at least the middle of the concave pads on the movement arm.
Accordingly, we would expect subjects with longer arms to have the chest pad set further out away from the arm pads.  And subjects with shorter arms would have the chest pad set in closer to the arm pads.  But the following point must also be taken into consideration.
Aside from arm length, the subject’s torso size is also a factor that needs to be considered.  A larger torso/abdomen would automatically position the subject further away from the arm pads.  To account for this, we may need to bring the chest pad in closer to the arm pads.  And a smaller torso may have the chest pad set further back away from the arm pads.
Importantly, given the juxtaposed situations outlined in the two points above, we need to consider the interplay of arm length AND torso size to find the optimal chest pad setting.  Ultimately, the determining factor would be the requirement that the arm pads remain flush against the subject’s humerus/elbow throughout the movement.
Once the seat and chest pad are set, we may need to consider a gap to create more space to accommodate subjects at the starting point/lower turnaround.
And finally, the vertical location of and the hand placement on the handles should be considered.  Longer arms may require the handles to be slid up into a higher position so that the elbows land closer to the middle of the arm pads when the arms hang from the handles.  Additionally, if the subject finds the hand placement creates difficulty in achieving the external rotation required to perform the movement, then they may be advised to “cap” the ends of the handles so that their palms are facing them.  This usually allows for a more comfortable execution of the movement at the shoulder.
Posture/Get Set:
Chest up, hips close to the chest pad so that abdomen is on the pad, chin slightly tucked (neutral), arms inside the pads with hands on handles.
Ideally this exercise will be performed with the abdomen against the chest pad so that the ribcage may be lifted, allowing for more thoracic extension and increasing scapular retraction.
This exercise will start at the lower turnaround with an emphasized, chest up posture.  Feet on the floor, possibly on the toe of the shoe for subjects with higher seats and shorter legs.
Execution, Instruction, and Turnarounds:
LOAD UP:  From the starting position (lower turn), keeping chest up, neutral head position, arms in place, establish breathing, and gradually begin to apply pressure by driving out through the elbows.
Once the instructor has given the cue to begin the load up, there should be a quiet moment where the instructor is intently observing the actions.  If done properly, a simple “perfect” or “yes, just like that” is an opportunity for positive feedback.
CONCENTRIC/UPPER TURN:  Subject will move through this first concentric phase, lifting their chest and drawing their shoulder blades together until they can no longer contract any further (upper turn).  Once the desired duration is achieved in the contracted position (either brief pause of 1 second or slightly longer squeeze of 2 to 3 seconds), the instructor will click at that exact moment.
ECCENTRIC:  The click is immediately followed with the instruction to “ease out,  do not speed up” or something to that effect.
The instructor then needs to establish the expectation for the first lower turnaround of the set, which on a Simple Row will be to “touch and go” or “be continuous” or “seamlessly change directions”.  Remember, there is always a cue to give on the first eccentric of an exercise.
LOWER TURN:  Touch and go at the lower turn as if “continuously passing through the bottom.”
Keep chest up by leveraging off of the chest pad with the abdomen.
One continuous pace with only a “brief but definite” pause of about one second in the contracted position of the first two reps and a squeeze of two to three seconds from the third rep on.  Keep in mind, we cannot simply rely on the cue of ‘squeeze’ in this situation.  That can mean various things to different people.  We need to teach them HOW to squeeze.
Verbiage for the pause/squeeze in the contracted position might be “leveraging off your abdomen, lift your chest and draw your shoulder blades together as hard as you can…keep breathing, keep still, [click], ease out, don’t speed up” or “keeping your head still, attempt to wrap your shoulder blades around your spine…there, lock it in place, [click], ease out.”  So during the desired duration of the squeeze in the contracted position, we are providing actionable instruction.
Maintain posture, head position, pace, and contact with the arm pads.
Importantly, the number of reps recorded will only be those that the instructor deems were full reps.  So if the client does not reach full contraction of the upper back, that is not a full rep and will not be recorded in the rep count on the chart.  But due to the nature of certain exercises, and Simple Row being one of them, it may make sense to continue the set despite the client no longer achieving full range of motion.  There will still be stimulative tension experienced on the partial reps as long as they are within the client’s exacting control.
The decision to continue a set after reaching concentric failure is highly individual and should be discussed with a studio Leader or with MSF Corporate.  For a brand new client, just completing a handful of full range of motion reps may be enough to introduce the exercise.  So in other words, we may not even take them to concentric failure if they are new to strength training or if they are showing signs of adverse discomfort or losing proper form.  This is a progressive journey.
While we are encouraging the subject to maintain their pace, they should expect to have to increase their effort over the course of a set.  Effort does not remain constant.  In order to maintain a given pace with increasing fatigue, effort needs to voluntarily increase as a counter to the fatigue.  This is how stimulative mechanical tension is created.
NOTES
Be prepared to point out the overhead mechanism on the machine upon every entry/exit, regardless of how many times a subject has used the machine.  A simple “watch your head” while pointing out the padded component is required to ensure the subject’s safety.
As with many exercises, we can expect each client to have varying capabilities in terms of range of motion.  We should encourage as much of a ROM through scapular retraction and ensure the subject is not leaning back to advance the movement arm.  Additionally, the instructor should use the first 2 or 3 reps to determine what each individual subject’s ROM is and use that to determine encouragement of effort and registering full repetitions.
The Simple Row exercise works well in situations where a client may be experiencing an elbow, wrist, or hand issue but we still wish to stimulate the upper back muscles.  It also works well for those that need to work on improving their posture and maybe best paired with the pulldown movement.  In this case, since the pulldown does not address scapular retraction, we can program the Simple Row as a complement without the concern of fatigued arms or grip strength.
Many subjects will come to us with shoulder issues and may or may not be able to tolerate this movement pattern.  While avoiding this exercise altogether would be the most conservative approach overall, we may be able to actually help the client by strengthening the area.  For those with no underlying orthopedic issue, the most conservative approach would be to perform a Timed Static Contraction (TSC).  In this situation, the instructor would pin a heavy enough weight so that the movement arm cannot be moved (i.e. too heavy to actually lift).  Then, with the client properly secured in the seat, the instructor will position the movement arm to some approximate midpoint in the range of motion, maybe slightly biased toward the upper turnaround.  The instructor would then lead the client through an increasing STATIC effort against the back pad.  This is typically a 50% effort for 30 seconds, a 75% effort for another 30 seconds, and a final 30 seconds at an all out effort, for a total of 90 seconds of continuous effort.  This approach when followed at least weekly for months at a time can build an appreciable level of strength contributing to improved function of shoulders.  There also tends to be a carryover effect to what has been estimated at 15 degrees in either direction of the position of the static exercise.  There is also a possibility that the client will be able to one day perform this exercise dynamically and continue to progress.
Importantly, while learning the Continuous Tension protocol, the subject will most likely be using a relatively light weight and as a result will probably be capable of performing a higher number of reps, spending more time on the machine.  While this may seem conducive to learning, it can also be counterproductive from a discomfort standpoint.  Yes a big part of the learning curve is to be able to produce an effort while managing discomfort, but there can be diminishing returns in that the movement becomes intolerable before it is stimulative.  Ideally we should be striving for perfect form with “faster” reps (i.e. 6 second positive, 6 second negative) and a “heavier” weight that leads to failure in 10 or fewer reps.  While this may not be achievable or advisable in the initial sessions, as long as the subject is demonstrating a clear understanding of the control required, we may progress the intensity more quickly.