Torso Rotation - MSF Comprehensive Overview
Target Muscles:
External Obliques - Spinal Rotation
Internal Obliques - Spinal Rotation
Synergists:
Rotatores - Spinal Rotation
Hip Abductors - Hip horizontal Abduction (stabilizers)
Rectus Abdominis (Abs) - Spinal Flexion/Posterior Pelvic Tilt
Considerations for setup:
SEAT: The seat position will be set prior to the client being seated.  There are two choices on this exercise.  Either the furthest rotated positions of 1 and 5 or the intermediate positions of 2 and 4.  Seat position 3 is in the centered, neutral position.
Most clients will be able to tolerate the largest degree of rotation of seat positions 1 and 5.
For the more deconditioned subject, or those that lack mobility, choose the more conservative seat positions of 2 and 4.
IMPORTANT:  Subjects with osteoporosis or osteopenia should not perform this movement dynamically as rotation is usually contraindicated.  There is a static option if they are medically cleared to do so in the ‘NOTES’ section below.
LEG PADS: Next determine the pad thickness to be used on the leg pads that come off the seat.  Most will use the thin pads; thick will be used for smaller framed subjects or those where we may desire a more stretched position.  Alternatively, one pad may be positioned on the thick setting and one thin, but this tends to overcomplicate things without providing much benefit.
ARM PADS: There are 6 possible settings for each arm pad.  In our experience, the optimal position for most clients will be pad position 1.  This will have the pad in the lowest and closest to the subject setting.  The pin will be in the upper most and furthest setting (position 1).
For taller subjects, it may be more comfortable to turn the roller pad to the higher settings, again keeping the pad closest to the subject’s torso.  This will land the pin in the lowest, furthest setting (position 4).
Beyond those two settings 1 and 4, it would only make sense to use the other positions for a wider client where they would benefit from having the roller pads further away from the torso.
This movement will start at the lower turnaround in the stretch position.  Ensure the seat is locked in place.  There is a stopper to prevent the seat from rotating beyond positions 1 and 5.  The instructor may have to push the seat against those stoppers to allow the pin to drop into the locked position.
Have the client take a seat and be sure to warn them to WATCH THEIR HEAD  as the workbox for the machine protrudes above the seat.
Posture/Get Set:
Ensure the subject is all the way back into the seat.  Their pelvis should crowd the back and hip pads to ensure pelvis will be stabilized.
Use a seat belt in situations where the subject cannot maintain a stationary pelvis.
Knees should be abducted out into the leg pads to be able to properly brace and leverage.  Feet flat on the floor and directly below the knees.  If the subject has shorter legs, consider using yoga blocks under the feet to better locate the knees into the pads.
Keeping hips square to the front edge of the seat, have the subject reach back and over both of the arm roller pads.  Most will want to run their forearms along the length of the pads and “cap” the ends with their hands.  This will spread the pressure more evenly across the arms.
The posture for this exercise should be a posterior pelvic tilt to better engage the abdominal muscles.  Even though this exercise does not directly target the rectus abdominis directly, it will help to emphasize the obliques.
Confirm that while the posterior pelvic tilt is activated, there is still contact made with the back pad.  As usual with this posture, it will be the mid back that is in contact with the back pad because of the rounded spine.
Execution, Instruction, and Turnarounds:
LOAD UP: The movement begins with a gradual load up.  Instruct the subject to “tighten down” or “crunch down” and remind them to keep contact between the mid back and the back pad.  This must also be monitored and encouraged throughout the set.
As with any exercise that begins with a gradual load up, the instructor should describe how to initiate the movement.
In the case of the TR, we are trying to simply attach the carriage to the ribcage.  This happens by FIRST drawing the far side roller into the body and THEN beginning to turn the ribcage.
As mentioned above, the knees/femurs should make contact with the leg pads with feet positioned directly under knees.  The instructor can cue the subject to drive into the pads but this will automatically happen as the subject initiates the movement.
CONCENTRIC:  Importantly, the subject must stay in the “tightened down,” posterior pelvic tilt posture while performing the movement.  The instinct will be to lift the chest in an effort to turn the carriage further.  This may lead to a larger ROM, but it will unload the targeted musculature.  Encourage the client to stay tight and look to create more tension/torque through the midsection with a more compact movement.
Watch for the hips to stay back in the pads and that the midback maintains contact with the back pad of the carriage.  If the hips rotate out of the hip pads, the knee on that side will slide forward.
Remind the subject that they are not trying to turn as far as they can and that a shorter, more compact rep will likely create more tension.
The subject should turn until they cannot get any tighter in the targeted muscles.  There is no end stop to be reached here, instead it is the congestion of the obliques that will terminate the concentric.
Ideally the head will follow the ribcage and will turn as the ribcage turns.  Alternatively the head can be kept still while the torso turns underneath.  Both options are preferred over the instinctive tendency of looking ahead of where the movement is going.  Every effort should be made to avoid turning the head ahead of or further than the movement itself.
The only movement of the carriage should come in conjunction with movement of the ribcage.  The arms should not produce further movement beyond the ribcage.
UPPER TURNAROUND:  At the instant the subject reaches the upper turnaround, there should be a brief pause in the contracted position (and a 2 to 3 second “squeeze” from the third rep on).  This is unlike our compound pushing movements (LP, CP, OH, SD) where the upper turnaround is met with continuous change of direction into the eccentric phase.  This brief pause and slightly longer squeeze require an additional level of focus and control, making the movement safer.  They also afford the subject an opportunity to “feel” the target muscles.
Verbiage during a squeeze might be “keep tight, keep breathing, [click], ease out” or “lock it in place, no movement, [click], ease out.” Keep in mind we need to teach the client HOW to squeeze.  Saying “squeeze” alone is not a useful instruction.  The MSF Exercise Practitioner is constantly teaching!
ECCENTRIC:  After the brief pause and following the ‘click’, the client will be reminded to “ease out”.
Client needs to keep the lower body completely stationary while only rotating the ribcage.  By keeping the lower body still, there will be an enhanced stretch, which will add to the stimulative effects of the exercise.
As the client is lowering the weight, the instructor should provide the necessary instruction as to when to change directions.  This will happen when the weights touch in the lower turnaround.  So prior to reaching this point, instruct the client to “maintain tension in the midsection turning only far enough to allow the weights to barely touch before changing directions and rotating the other way.”  Remember, there is always a cue to give on the first eccentric of any exercise.
LOWER TURNAROUND: Once the subject reaches the lower turnaround (i.e. weights touch), they will “immediately” or “continuously” or “seamlessly” change directions.  (Importantly, ‘immediate’ means right away, but does not mean suddenly in this case).  Another good cue might be to “drag your way through the bottom without pausing.”
NOTES
Osteoporosis/Osteopenia  It is our company policy that we ascertain any and all limitations and/or contraindications to resistance training for all of our clients and determine which movement patterns these may affect.  This is one of the primary purposes of having the prospective client complete the consultation paperwork.  It is also a primary purpose of the consultation itself, to understand the limitations of each individual and to tailor the workouts accordingly.  There will be certain subjects that do not tolerate rotation at the spine from an orthopedic standpoint.  This is typically seen in diagnoses of osteoporosis or osteopenia.  For these individuals it may make sense to omit the Torso Rotation movement pattern altogether until they have medical clearance or a better understanding of the diagnosis if they do not already have one.
While avoiding the TR altogether would be the most conservative approach for those with osteoporosis/osteopenia, we may be able to actually help the client by strengthening that movement pattern.  For those with this diagnosis, we can perform a Static Hold (SH) variation upon clearance from their doctor.
STATIC HOLD (SH) - To perform a SH, locate the seat to either of the more conservative seat settings 2 or 4.  Once properly seated and braced, turn the carriage (i.e. movement arm) so that it is square with the seat and the subject.  Have the subject wrap their arms over the roller pads and tighten down their midsection.  Perform an interpersonal handoff by having the subject gradually increase their force while the instructor reduces theirs, thus transferring the load entirely to the subject.  Once the desired time has been met (usually between 20 - 60 seconds), the instructor will grab the movement arm and have the subject carefully unload by removing their arms from the pads.  Instructor will then set the carriage down and rotate the seat to the other side to perform a set from that position.
STATIC HOLD (SH) - Importantly, when performing a SH, the subject will NEVER actually move.  There will be NO movement during the loading, unloading, or execution of the SH.  This is the whole point of doing a static to begin with, to protect the client from performing contraindicated movements.
The instinctive tendency for this exercise, and all exercises really, will be to turn the movement arm as far as it can go.  The problem with this approach is that it often leads to less tension in the targeted muscles because the effort has to be outsourced to the arms.
When considering the number of reps to perform on this particular exercise, we must remember that this exercise is done twice.  There will be a set done while rotating in one direction and then another for the other direction.  Because of this the normal range of 6 to 10 reps will likely be excessive.  Instead aim for a set of 4 to 7 reps in each direction.
In addition to the above, it is also important that we try and match the reps performed for each side of the body.  Because of this, we should avoid training to failure on the first set and we should provide enough of a rest period to allow the subject to regain their strength for the second set.  The last rep of the first set should be challenging but still short of failure.