A/B Routines - How to Optimize Programming
When considering an optimal A/B routine for the general population, we must
first remind ourselves that hypertrophy is muscle fiber specific. Meaning only
those muscle fibers recruited/activated by an exercise will benefit from a
training stimulus. In other words, if we are implementing a full body program,
then an individual workout should target as many muscle fibers (i.e. muscle
groups) as possible.
The next critical consideration to make is that long-term hypertrophy is only
accomplished with an at least twice per week stimulus (i.e. minimum effective
dose). This, in connection with the fact that hypertrophy is muscle fiber
specific, means that similar muscle fibers/regions must be stimulated twice
per week. If we program with “too much” variety, we will dilute the required
frequency. For instance, if we target the pecs directly in an A routine but then
neglect them in the B routine, the net effect will be that we are only truly
targeting those fibers once per week. While this may be enough to ensure
strength gains over time, it will likely fall short in terms of continually building
muscle beyond a certain level of development.
Importantly, strength is not an adaptation itself but rather an outcome of the
following six adaptations:
● Improved coordination
● Increased Motor Unit Recruitment (MUR)
● Decreased antagonist coactivation
● Hypertrophy
● Increased tendon stiffness
● Lateral force transmission
You’ll note that one of the adaptations of strength is the increase in muscle
tissue, or hypertrophy. Hypertrophy is its own adaptation and it contributes to
the outcome that is increased strength. While most of the adaptations that
underpin strength are more easily achieved and with less frequency
(especially the first three CNS adaptations), hypertrophy requires a twice per
week stimulus over the long term. Importantly, muscle tissue will absolutely
be built with a once per week frequency, especially in a more novice subject,
but the most optimal approach is to target the same muscle fibers more
frequently.
In considering the points outlined above, the ideal training program would
consist of as many exercises as can be recovered from that target as many
muscle fibers as possible. And this program would repeat with zero variation,
indefinitely. But this approach is not realistic as most clients will expect and
appreciate variety. Unfortunately, people are too easily “bored” with exercise
programs even if they would produce better long-term results. Because of
this, we must find ways to be creative with our programming to accomplish
the following:
● Coverage of the desired target areas (most will be full body)
● Variety to satisfy/motivate the client
● Consistency of the stimulus (frequency of similar muscle regions)
One last concept to be aware of before presenting an optimal A/B routine is
what’s known as regional hypertrophy. Essentially, with regional hypertrophy,
there is an additive benefit for novice trainees due to their lack of muscular
development. This benefit allows more muscle regions to be stimulated from
a given exercise, especially compound movements, than would be in a more
advanced subject. For purposes of illustrating this point, let’s consider the
Chest Press exercise. In a novice subject, the Chest Press will stimulate (and
therefore grow) the muscles of the chest, shoulders, and triceps. In an
advanced subject the Chest Press will likely only grow one of those muscle
groups because the others will have been fully developed to the extent they
can by that movement. This is great news for beginners because they will get
“more bang for their buck” on fewer movements. It also helps us with
programming as we can cover more area with compound exercises (e.g. Big
5) and have a better chance of actually stimulating most of the muscles in
the body. The other side of this is that advanced subjects will likely require
more specific single joint exercises to ensure a stimulus.
Where to start:
During the consultation, the client will most likely be introduced to three
exercises. These three exercises will become a core part of the client’s routine
moving forward . Eventually they can be more strategically programmed to
benefit an advanced trainee, but in the early stages we will build upon these
movements:
1. Leg Press
2. Compound Row
3. Lumbar
How to evolve:
(Importantly, the following program is just an example meant to give an idea of how to view
long term programming). Now, let’s look at what an optimal A/B routine might
eventually evolve into and discuss some of the reasoning behind the
exercises and placement chosen. Keep in mind this routine would be
developed after a client has been with us for at least two months:
A routine B routine
ADD(f)/LC(m) ABD
SD(f)/CP(m) Pd
CR LC (f)/Flye(m)
TR/Abs LE
OH(f)/LR(m) SR
PO CP(f)/OH(m)
LP Lumb
f = female; m = male
The first thing to note is that there are 7 exercises in each routine. While there
is nothing inherently “magical” about that number, it has been consistently
proven to be achievable by hundreds of MSF clients over the years.
‘Achievable’ here means that they can be completed in the allotted time and
with the requisite intensity to ensure a stimulus. Remember, 20 minutes is the
MINIMUM time, not the standard. If we are to get consistent long-term results
for our clients, most sessions will exceed the 20 minute mark.
The next thing we should point out here is that there are a few instances
where specific ‘female’ exercises are programmed and specific ‘male’
exercises are programmed. This is simply based on the fact that over the
years, these groups have generally requested certain areas of the body be
targeted. For instance, females have generally requested more abdominal
and hip work, whereas males have requested more chest, shoulders, and low
back. At the end of the day, we don’t have to strictly adhere to these
differentiations outlined above. In fact, it would be more advisable to refer to
the specific request of each client. In this case, and for more examples please
see the Exercise Selection Template document located here:
Academy - Programming and Progression 7 - Exercise Selection Template
.
The most unique attribute of the A/B routines posted above is in the attempt
to provide overlapping coverage of muscle regions, while also creating
variety for the clients. For instance, in an effort to ensure that the entirety of
the upper back muscles are trained in both sessions, the A routine includes
the Compound Row (rear delt, traps, rhomboids, biceps) and Pullover (lats).
The B routine, then, includes the Simple Row (rear delt, traps, rhomboids) and
Pulldown (lats, biceps). Another example would be that of the muscles of the
lower body. In the A routine, we rely on the Leg Press (quads, glutes, hips) and
in the B routine we have programmed the Leg Extension (quads), Abduction
(glutes, hips), and Lumbar (glutes, adductors).
Lumbar and Leg Press:
Also notice that the Lumbar and the Leg Press are eventually split and
become part of two different workouts. It has been our experience that these
two exercises are better when they are not performed in the same workout.
There tends to be some degree of “interference” in the lower back created
during the Lumbar and then sensed during the Leg Press. This does not mean
that these two exercises can never be performed in the same workout or that
it is inherently dangerous. It is just that we can proactively prevent this from
becoming an issue by performing Lumbar with Leg Extension instead of Leg
Press. So we will introduce the Lumbar and Leg Press together during the
consult but then eventually split them up as the subject becomes stronger
and more proficient at training intensely. However, if these two exercises are
performed in the same workout then make sure to put as much space
between them to minimize any overlapping lower back sensations. We
should never perform these two exercises consecutively unless to use the
Lumbar as a much lighter, therapeutic modality.
At this point, one might wonder, “what is to be done with the other machines
in the studio”? The answer to that is quite simple. Find any and every
opportunity to use them to tailor the workout experience to the client. This is
also where the Exercise Selection Template linked above will come into play. If
for instance, we had a client that wanted to target their arms specifically, then
using the Biceps Curl and/or Triceps Extension machines would be a priority.
These can easily be added on to the existing routines above if time permits or
used to replace a lower priority muscle group. Just make sure that the arms,
in this case, are being targeted in both workouts in keeping with the twice per
week frequency requirement.
One last point to make here is that these routines should take at least 8 weeks
(or 16 sessions) to fully build out. It is in our and the client’s best interest to
slowly introduce these movements over time rather than all at once. There is
a learning curve to our training methodology and the focus needs to be on
the quality of the execution and tolerance of intensity. This is only
complicated by constantly adding in new movement patterns. Plus, it creates
an expectation of the client that exercise variety is somehow necessary. They
will come to believe that the next new machine is “the one they’ve been
missing”, when it is likely their execution and intensity that are holding them
back. Remember, they will begin with an A routine that will take two to three
weeks alone to begin to master before then gradually building out the B
routine. The B routine should be established by replacing one
complementary exercise of the A routine every week or so until the new
routine has been completed in its entirety. Please reference the article
entitled Exercise Selection and Long-Term Programming for more insight
on how to progress various client types over time.