MSF Exercise Selection Template
The following document can be used as a guideline when determining which
exercises to incorporate for the Initial Consultation as well as when
establishing an initial A and B routine for a variety of client types. In some
situations, a client may come to us down the road with a new goal or concern,
in which case we can begin to modify their routine accordingly.
The most sensible place to start will be the client’s intake form
(demographics) where they will list any orthopedic issues or concerns they
have along with any goals or target areas they would like to address. This
form, in addition to the discussions we have with them during the consultation
or in subsequent sessions will provide insight as to what movement patterns
will be most beneficial. Keep in mind that from a very high level, a
conservative approach would be to simply select one movement from each
of the following five categories:
Upper Body - Upper Body - Lower Body Trunk/Spine/ Hips
Push Pull Core
- Chest Press - Compound - Leg Press - Lumbar Ext - ABduction
- Overhead Row - Leg Curl - Abdominals - ADduction
Press - Pulldown - Leg Extension - Cervical Ext
- Seated Dip - Torso Arm - Calf - Torso Rotation
- Chest Flye - Pullover
- Lateral Raise - Simple Row
- Triceps Ext - Biceps
However, in an effort to be responsive to the client’s needs and goals, please
consider the following commonly reported conditions and the possible
exercises to include when constructing an applicable training program. Keep
in mind these are just suggestions and can be used more for guidelines or
ideas rather than formal rules. Importantly, the last column, “Eventual A + B”,
would be something that should be progressed to over the course of several
months or more. Again, it is included here simply to show how a routine
MIGHT evolve over time. Additionally, in any of the situations below, an eighth
or possibly ninth exercise can be added to any of the workouts (key exercises
should be repeated in the A and B) to make for a more complete/customized
routine. See more info here: A/B Routines - How to Optimize Programming
Reported Consult First Second Eventual
Condition or Exercises Workout Workout A + B
Goal (2nd visit)
Clear/ LP, CR, Lumb ABD/ADD, Lumb, CR, A - ADD, SD,
No issues - Lumb, CR, SD, ABD/ADD, SD, CR, TR, OH,
Female LP PO, LP PO, LP
B - ABD, Pd,
CP, LC, SR, LE,
Lumb
Clear/ LP, CR, Lumb Lumb, CP, CR, CR, CP, Lumb, A - CR, CP,
No issues - OH, LP Pd, OH, LP LC, TR, PO, LR,
Male LP
B - ABD, Pd,
Flye, Lumb,
SR, OH, LE
Reported Consult First Second Eventual
Condition or Exercises Workout Workout A + B
Goal (2nd visit)
Low Back LP (P3?), CR, Lumb, ABD, Lumb, ABD, A - Lumb, CR,
issues Lumb (test CR, CP/SD, LP CR, CP/SD, CP, ABD, PO,
tolerance of (P3?) Pd, LP LE, TR
mvmt pattern
B - Cx, Lumb,
first with 20lbs
Pd, SD, ADD,
for ~3 reps then
SR, LP
consider ↑)
Knee issues LC, LP, CR ADD, CR, LC, ADD, CR, LC, A - ADD, CR,
CP/SD, LP CP/SD, Pd, LP CP, TR, LC, PO,
LP
B - SR, ABD,
SD, LC, Pd,
Lumb, LE
Shoulder LP, CR, CR, OH, Pd, LP SR, TR, OH, Pd, A - SR, TR, OH,
issues OH (assess LP Pd, LC, SD, LP
tolerance of B - SR, ABD,
mvmt pattern
OH, CR, Lumb,
and ROM)
LE, PO
Increase LP, CR, TR/Abs TR, CR, OH, LP TR, PO, OH, A - TR, PO,
“core” CR, LP OH, ADD, CR,
strength Flye, LP
B - Abs, Pd,
CP, ABD, SR,
Lumb, LE
Upper Body LP, CR, OH SD, CR, OH, LP Abs, SD, CR, A - SD, CR,
Strength OH, LP Abs, LR, PO,
Flye, LP
B - Pd, CP,
Lumb, SR, OH,
LE, Biceps
Reported Consult First Second Eventual
Condition or Exercises Workout Workout A + B
Goal (2nd visit)
Lower Body LP, CR, LC LC, CR, OH, LP ADD, CR, LC, A - ADD, CR,
Strength (or OH, LP TR, OH, LC, PO,
balance) LP
B - LC, Pd, CP,
Lumb, SR,
ABD, LE
Strengthen/ LP, CR, OH CR, OH, LP, CR, CP, LP, A - Biceps,
Build arms Biceps Biceps, OH SD, Abs, CR,
Flye, Triceps,
LP
B - Triceps,
Pd, Lumb, CP,
SR, Biceps, LE
Improve LP, SR, Lumb Lumb, SR, OH, SR, Lumb, OH, A - SR, ADD,
Posture LP Pd, LP CP, LC,
CR(neut), TR,
LP
B - Cx, Lumb,
ABD, SD,
CR(pro), Flye,
LE
Injured LP, SR, Flye Abs, SR, Flye, ADD, Abs, SR, A - ADD, Abs,
elbow/hand/ LP Flye, LP SR, Flye, LC,
wrist PO, LP
B - Lumb,
Flye, PO, ABD,
LR, LC, LE
Programming and/or sequencing to potentially avoid:
● LE+LP - Leg Extension and Leg Press in the same session tends to be a
lot of quadriceps stimulus. This should rarely be used for our clients
especially those that are intensity adverse or in the older demographic.
These two exercises would be more beneficial on two non-consecutive
days as we are ensuring a more frequent stimulus for the quads while
allowing enough time for recovery. If we do decide to include in the
same workout, make sure it is what the client needs and do not push to
failure on both exercises (or either) when introducing. This should be
discussed with the Studio Leader before implementing.
● Lumb→LP - Performing Lumbar directly into Leg Press should be
avoided as the fatigue from the lumbar exercise will invariably carry
over into the leg press. Even when the lumbar is performed at a lower
intensity. This can be an extremely uncomfortable feeling for the wrong
reasons. The instructor may find the complementary pairing of Lumbar
with Leg Extension (instead of LP) to be beneficial.
● Lumb→LC - During a properly executed Leg Curl, there will be a
tendency to extend the lower back, especially as effort increases. If we
complete a set of Lumbar Extension immediately before the Leg Curl,
the fatigue in the lower back will tend to make the extension required on
the LC extremely uncomfortable. Especially for those subjects that are
sensitive to spinal extension. For this reason, it may be better advised to
program these two movements in separate workouts.
● LP/LE→Lumb/Abs - Performing any quadriceps movement directly into
Lumbar can be quite uncomfortable on the quadriceps because of the
pressure from the femur restraint mechanism. Additionally, the Lumbar
requires a higher level of technical proficiency and control as a means
of ensuring safety. When the lower body has been fatigued
immediately beforehand, it makes the Lumbar exercise harder to
accurately perform.
● Pd→CR or CR→Pd - When two pulling movements are back to back in a
workout, the gripping muscles will likely be the limiting factor. For many
subjects, the gripping muscles are already a limiting factor with just one
pulling movement. If the gripping muscles are extremely weak, we can
be assured that they will adapt to grow stronger over time just as any
other muscle will that is progressively challenged.
● Lumb+Abs/Torso Rotation - Lumbar with Abdominals in the same
workout can be problematic from the standpoint of the immediate
effect of weakening of the core/trunk musculature. If one were to
perform Lumbar first, the fatigue experienced in the low back would be
present while performing the abdominal exercise. Since abdominals
are ultimately trunk flexion, the low back is required to round/stretch,
which can be uncomfortable after having been trained. Furthermore,
the subject is likely to sense that the lower back is fatigued, which then
becomes their point of focus. A similar consequence will be had if the
Abdominals are trained prior to the Lumbar muscles in the same
workout. Having said all of this, it may still be beneficial in some
situations to include both movements in the same workout. If a client is
only training with us once per week and we wish to address both sets of
muscles, it would be permissible to include both exercises. Additionally,
there is a therapeutic effect that we can create training both
movement patterns in the same workout. If this is the case, it seems
through experience that performing the Abdominal exercise first with
the Lumbar performed several exercises later is the best approach.
Basically, having fatigued abdominals going into Lumbar exercise is a
more conservative approach then having fatigued lumbar muscles
going into the Abdominal exercise. Additionally, both weights should be
conservatively set and because this will be used as a more therapeutic
approach, we are not looking for a high intensity effort. Use this
approach with caution and involve your Studio Leader and/or MSF Corp
to devise a strategy.
● Any push→push or pull→pull - This is commonly known as a prefatigue
in the strength training world. And while it has been popularized
specifically by the high intensity faction, it is based on the faulty
premise that fatigue is a stimulus for hypertrophy. Recall that
mechanical tension is the only documented driver of hypertrophy and
that importantly, only a recruited motor unit can experience tension. If
we are training overlapping muscle groups (i.e. muscle fibers) back to
back, there will undoubtedly be some fatigue present from the exercise
before. This fatigue acts to reduce the motor unit recruitment (MUR) in
the targeted muscle group(s) and as a result, the potential stimulus is
diminished. Because of this, it is optimal to train non-overlapping
muscles in consecutive sets. For instance, we would not want to
perform a chest flye into the chest press, as the output possible in the
chest press will be greatly reduced. Same with compound row into
pulldown or leg extension into leg press. All of these pairings present
the same problem; a reduction in MUR, which has negative
consequences in terms of creating a stimulus.
Discussion on number of exercises
In the above examples you’ll notice that most of the workouts were
constructed with 7 exercises. This should eventually be the average number
of exercises in a session. Keep in mind that as MSF Exercise Practitioners, we
want to provide a REMARKABLE experience for every client and every workout.
Part of that experience can be attributed to the fact that the workout should
last at least 20 minutes and even longer than that in a majority of cases.
For a relatively new client, 5 exercises should likely take longer than 20
minutes for a couple of reasons. Firstly, we should be intentionally
underestimating the strength of the new client in an effort to allow them to
learn how to control their movement without being completely overwhelmed.
It should still be challenging as the set progresses, which would most likely
land them at a 10 - 12 or more rep set. In addition to the higher number of
reps contributing to a longer session, a new client will require the setup of
each exercise along with more instruction and explanation. There will
typically be discussions after each set too to reinforce the important
concepts for our training protocol. Remember, we are teaching them an
invaluable skill.
As a client progresses in their understanding and their level of strength, the
instructor can challenge them with more load. As the load increases, the reps
will decrease into the 6 to 10 range, which would be considered ideal for MOST
(not all) clients. Along with that, they will require virtually no setup time and
there will be limited instruction necessary as they will have been learning this
whole time. As a result, the time per exercise will decrease, which will be more
conducive to performing 6 to 8 exercises during the half hour time period.