MSF Exercise Selection Template
The following document can be used as a guideline when determining which exercises to incorporate for the Initial Consultation as well as when establishing an initial A and B routine for a variety of client types.  In some situations, a client may come to us down the road with a new goal or concern, in which case we can begin to modify their routine accordingly.
The most sensible place to start will be the client’s intake form (demographics) where they will list any orthopedic issues or concerns they have along with any goals or target areas they would like to address.  This form, in addition to the discussions we have with them during the consultation or in subsequent sessions will provide insight as to what movement patterns will be most beneficial.  Keep in mind that from a very high level, a conservative would be to simply select one movement from each of the following five categories:
However, in an effort to be more responsive to the client’s needs and goals, please consider the following commonly reported/requested conditions and the possible exercises to include when constructing a relevant training program.  Keep in mind these are just suggestions and can be used more for guidelines or ideas rather than formal rules.  Importantly, the last column, “Eventual A + B”, would be something that should be progressed to over the course of several months or more.  Again, it is included here simply to show how a routine MIGHT evolve over time.  Additionally, in any of the situations below, an eighth or possibly ninth exercise can be added to any of the workouts (key exercises should be repeated in the A and B) to make for a more complete/customized routine.
Programming and/or sequencing to potentially avoid:
LE+LP - Leg Extension and Leg Press in the same session tends to be a lot of quadriceps stimulus.  This should rarely be used for our clients especially those that are intensity adverse or in the older demographic.  These two exercises would be more beneficial on two non-consecutive days as we are ensuring a more frequent stimulus for the quads while allowing enough time for recovery.  If we do decide to include in the same workout, make sure it is what the client needs and do not push to failure on both exercises (or either) when introducing.  This should be discussed with the Studio Leader before implementing.
Lumb→LP - Performing Lumbar directly into Leg Press should be avoided as the fatigue from the lumbar exercise will invariably carry over into the leg press.  Even when the lumbar is performed at a lower intensity.  This can be an extremely uncomfortable feeling for the wrong reasons.  The instructor may find the complementary pairing of Lumbar with Leg Extension (instead of LP) to be beneficial.
Lumb→LC - During a properly executed Leg Curl, there will be a tendency to extend the lower back, especially as effort increases.  If we complete a set of Lumbar Extension immediately before the Leg Curl, the fatigue in the lower back will tend to make the extension required on the LC extremely uncomfortable.  Especially for those subjects that are sensitive to spinal extension.  For this reason, it may be better advised to program these two movements in separate workouts.
LP/LE→Lumb/Abs - Performing any quadriceps movement directly into Lumbar can be quite uncomfortable on the quadriceps because of the pressure from the femur restraint mechanism.  Additionally, the Lumbar requires a higher level of technical proficiency and control as a means of ensuring safety.  When the lower body has been fatigued immediately beforehand, it makes the Lumbar exercise harder to accurately perform.
Pd→CR or CR→Pd - When two pulling movements are back to back in a workout, the gripping muscles will likely be the limiting factor.  For many subjects, the gripping muscles are already a limiting factor with just one pulling movement.  If the gripping muscles are extremely weak, we can be assured that they will adapt to grow stronger over time just as any other muscle will that is progressively challenged.
Lumb+Abs/Torso Rotation - Lumbar with Abdominals in the same workout can be problematic from the standpoint of the immediate effect of weakening of the core/trunk musculature.  If one were to perform Lumbar first, the fatigue experienced in the low back would be present while performing the abdominal exercise.  Since abdominals are ultimately trunk flexion, the low back is required to round/stretch, which can be uncomfortable after having been trained.  Furthermore, the subject is likely to sense that the lower back is fatigued, which then becomes their point of focus.  A similar consequence will be had if the Abdominals are trained prior to the Lumbar muscles in the same workout.  Having said all of this, it may still be beneficial in some situations to include both movements in the same workout.  If a client is only training with us once per week and we wish to address both sets of muscles, it would be permissible to include both exercises.  Additionally, there is a therapeutic effect that we can create training both movement patterns in the same workout.  If this is the case, it seems through experience that performing the Abdominal exercise first with the Lumbar performed several exercises later is the best approach.  Basically, having fatigued abdominals going into Lumbar exercise is a more conservative approach then having fatigued lumbar muscles going into the Abdominal exercise.  Additionally, both weights should be conservatively set and because this will be used as a more therapeutic approach, we are not looking for a high intensity effort.  Use this approach with caution and involve your Studio Leader and/or MSF Corp to devise a strategy.
Any push→push or pull→pull - This is commonly known as a prefatigue in the strength training world.  And while it has been popularized specifically by the high intensity faction, it is based on the faulty premise that fatigue is a stimulus for hypertrophy.  Recall that mechanical tension is the only documented driver of hypertrophy and that importantly, only a recruited motor unit can experience tension.  If we are training overlapping muscle groups (i.e. muscle fibers) back to back, there will undoubtedly be some fatigue present from the exercise before.  This fatigue acts to reduce the motor unit recruitment (MUR) in the targeted muscle group(s) and as a result, the potential stimulus is diminished.  Because of this, it is optimal to train non-overlapping muscles in consecutive sets.  For instance, we would not want to perform a chest flye into the chest press, as the output possible in the chest press will be greatly reduced.  Same with compound row into pulldown or leg extension into leg press.  All of these pairings present the same problem; a reduction in MUR, which has negative consequences in terms of creating a stimulus.
Discussion on number of exercises
In the above examples you’ll notice that most of the workouts were constructed with 7 exercises.  This should eventually be the average number of exercises in a session.  Keep in mind that as MSF Exercise Practitioners, we want to provide a REMARKABLE experience for every client and every workout.  Part of that experience can be attributed to the fact that the workout should last at least 20 minutes and even longer than that in a majority of cases.
For a relatively new client, 5 exercises should likely take longer than 20 minutes for a couple of reasons.  Firstly, we should be intentionally underestimating the strength of the new client in an effort to allow them to learn how to control their movement without being completely overwhelmed.  It should still be challenging as the set progresses, which would most likely land them at a 10 - 12 or more rep set.  In addition to the higher number of reps contributing to a longer session, a new client will require the setup of each exercise along with more instruction and explanation.  There will typically be discussions after each set too to reinforce the important concepts for our training protocol.  Remember, we are teaching them an invaluable skill.
As a client progresses in their understanding and their level of strength, the instructor can challenge them with more load.  As the load increases, the reps will decrease into the 6 to 10 range, which would be considered ideal for MOST (not all) clients.  Along with that, they will require virtually no setup time and there will be limited instruction necessary as they will have been learning this whole time.  As a result, the time per exercise will decrease, which will be more conducive to performing 6 to 8 exercises during the half hour time period.
Upper Body - Push | Upper Body - Pull | Lower Body | Trunk/Spine/
Core | Hips
- Chest Press
- Overhead Press
- Seated Dip
- Chest Flye
- Lateral Raise
- Triceps Ext | - Compound Row
- Pulldown
- Torso Arm
- Pullover
- Simple Row
- Biceps | - Leg Press
- Leg Curl
- Leg Extension
- Calf | - Lumbar Ext
- Abdominals
- Cervical Ext
- Torso Rotation | - ABduction
- ADduction
Reported Condition or Goal | Consult Exercises | First Workout (2nd visit) | Second Workout | Eventual        A + B
Clear/
No issues - Female | LP, CR, SD | ABD/ADD, CR, SD, Abs, LP | CR, ABD/ADD, PO, SD, Abs, LP | A - ADD, SD, Pd, Abs, OH, SR, LP
B - ABD, CR, CP, LC, PO, LE, TR
Clear/
No issues - 
Male | LP, CR, CP | Lumb, CP, CR, OH, LP | CR, CP, Lumb, Pd, OH, LP | A - CR, CP, TR, PO, LC, LR, LP
B - ABD, Pd, OH, Lumb, SR, Flye, LE
Reported Condition or Goal | Consult Exercises | First Workout (2nd visit) | Second Workout | Eventual        A + B
Low Back issues | LP (P3?), CR, Lumb (test tolerance of mvmt pattern first with 20lbs for ~3 reps then consider ↑) | Lumb, ABD, CR, CP/SD, LP (P3?) | Lumb, ABD, CR, CP/SD, Pd, LP | A - Lumb, CR, CP, ABD, PO, LE, TR
B - Cx, Lumb, Pd,  SD, ADD, SR, LP
Knee issues | LC, LP, CR | ADD, CR, LC, CP/SD, LP | ADD, CR, LC, CP/SD, Pd, LP | A - ADD, CR, CP, TR, LC, PO, LP
B - SR, ABD, SD, LC, Pd, Lumb, LE
Shoulder issues | LP, CR, 
OH (assess tolerance of mvmt pattern and ROM) | CR, OH, Pd, LP | SR, TR, OH, Pd, LP | A - SR, TR, OH, Pd, LC, SD, LP
B - SR, ABD, OH, CR, Lumb, LE, PO
Increase “core” strength | LP, CR, TR/Abs | TR, CR, OH, LP | TR, PO, OH, CR, LP | A - TR, PO, OH, ADD, CR, Flye, LP
B - Abs, Pd, CP, ABD, SR, Lumb, LE
Upper Body Strength | LP, CR, OH | SD, CR, OH, LP | Abs, SD, CR, OH, LP | A - SD, CR, Abs, LR, PO, Flye, LP
B - Pd, CP, Lumb, SR, OH, LE, Biceps
Reported Condition or Goal | Consult Exercises | First Workout (2nd visit) | Second Workout | Eventual        A + B
Lower Body Strength (or balance) | LP, CR, LC | LC, CR, OH, LP | ADD, CR, LC, OH, LP | A - ADD, CR, TR, OH, LC, PO, LP
B - LC, Pd, CP, Lumb, SR, ABD, LE
Strengthen/
Build arms | LP, CR, OH | CR, OH, LP, Biceps | CR, CP, LP, Biceps, OH | A - Biceps, SD, Abs, CR, Flye, Triceps, LP
B - Triceps, Pd, Lumb, CP, SR, Biceps, LE
Improve Posture | LP, SR, Lumb | Lumb, SR, OH, LP | SR, Lumb, OH, Pd, LP | A - SR, ADD, CP, LC, CR(neut), TR, LP
B - Cx, Lumb, ABD, SD, CR(pro), Flye, LE
Injured elbow/hand/
wrist | LP, SR, Flye | Abs, SR, Flye, LP | ADD, Abs, SR, Flye, LP | A - ADD, Abs, SR, Flye, LP
B - Lumb, PO, ABD, LR, LE