Consider this a wake up call. Or perhaps “tough love” is more accurate. However you may come to view it, please understand the extent to which we are genuinely humbled by your trust in us and your commitment to our protocol. And we remain driven to provide the most efficient, effective, and safe, life transforming workouts. But there’s room for improvement. With that in mind and with the warmer weather upon us, we figured what better time to revisit the MaxStrength Fitness Mastery Series!
Why the apparent excitement and use of an exclamation point? What is the Mastery Series you ask? While some of you may remember this from years ago, trust that this new, reimagined iteration is well worth the revisit. With a new scientific understanding emerging and the apparent awakening of the medical community to the benefits of strength training, we began to look inside our own systems and realized that there was an opportunity to get better. To lean even harder into what the research is confirming and to what thousands of our own real world case studies have revealed. An opportunity for a sort of kaizen as we refer to it around here.
But for this improvement to be fully realized, a new level of attentiveness and involvement is required. From everyone in the studio; instructors and trainees alike. And while we’ve been doing essentially the same thing for almost 20 years, and don’t plan on changing, recent information has suggested we narrow our focus. The MSF Mastery Series is an attempt to simplify the understanding of productive strength training.
And truer words have never been spoken when you consider that ‘simple’ in this case does not indicate ‘easy’. In fact, many of you should find the training more difficult or challenging. But it is in this difficulty that true, long term physiological benefits are achieved. Both physical and mental. Learning to accept or cope with a difficult endeavor can not only help you through a productive set of exercise but can be an invaluable life skill that is adaptable to almost any situation. So think of this new approach as an intensive study on human behavior. Your behavior! Let’s see if by fully embracing this new challenge, we can actually optimize our strength training experience and better yet, our lives.
So with the gauntlet firmly in place, let’s introduce our first topic of interest.
Posture.
Yes, your posture.
Now, we've been setting your posture on every exercise of every workout you’ve ever performed with us. But some of you haven’t held your posture as if your lives depended on it. So when we instruct you to “maintain your posture” we mean it! Literally fight with every ounce of awareness and strength to NOT move. Again, simple, but not easy. If you are not properly positioned on an exercise or if that positioning changes, there is a weakening of the structure and a decrease or shifting in motor unit recruitment (MUR). This is just a fancy way of indicating which and how many muscle fibers are contributing or targeted. And losing our posture diminishes the effectiveness of the exercise.
Your ‘posture’ as we refer to it almost always includes your head but also often includes your torso, ribcage, and spine. We want to keep those components rigidly still. If we shift or wiggle, we might as well end the set because everything’s changed. We’re now doing a different exercise, targeting different motor units (i.e. muscles). Not to mention that when we lose our posture we lose power/leverage and even worse, we introduce a potential safety issue.
So let’s just see what changes, what feels different, when we pay attention to our posture that our instructor establishes and we actually work to maintain that posture! For the entire duration of the exercise. Not just at the onset. So just like before, let’s push ourselves harder than we’ve ever pushed but this time let’s also work to hold our posture. And most importantly, let’s get excited about the potential for new progress when we commit to this all important attribute.

Be strong,
Jeff