MaxStrength Fitness Mastery Series - Issue 4 - PURPOSE
For this next installment of the MSF Mastery Series, we’re going to highlight the 4th and final “P” of the Four P’s of strength training, Purpose.  Now you could conceivably master the first three P’s, Posture, Pace, and Path, in a matter of a handful of workouts.  The MSF Continuous Tension protocol, instruction, and equipment are designed to facilitate this learning curve.  This last “P” however…could take a lifetime of work.  And this lifetime of work is what will produce the long term results we seek.  This is the “secret” that everyone is looking for when it comes to fitness.
Let’s assume you were to only read this particular entry of our Mastery Series and had no idea about the previous topics of Posture, Pace, or Path.  And let’s assume you really dug in and took this strength training thing seriously and made it your goal to fully understand and implement this month’s topic of PURPOSE.  If you were to have any level of success in doing so, you would automatically be on your way to mastering the others.
It is commonly known that the purpose of strength training is to create a stimulus and ultimately an adaptation, or basically to get stronger.  But what we mean by ‘Purpose’ in the context of our protocol, has to do with our mental approach during the set.  What is your true intent in the moment?  Most of us are probably operating on an instinctive level.  That’s to be expected.  That’s how we’re “wired” so to speak.  But here’s the problem with this approach.  Our instincts do not want us to be struggling on a resistance training machine.  Our instincts really don’t want us to struggle at all.  This is known in the physiology world as our Perception of Effort and it acts to protect us, to limit our exertion from becoming harmful, and it’s a very valuable mechanism to have.  But in order to get stronger and to truly progress over a lifetime, we need to operate with our intuition.  At least during our exercise.  We need to increase our tolerance to training or our Maximum Tolerable Perception of Effort.  What’s the best way to go about doing this you might ask…by performing more strength training sessions!
We become more tolerant of training by training.  This is the real secret that drives lifelong results.
Remember, the immediate goal of our exercise is to create a stimulative (i.e. significant) level of mechanical tension in as many muscle fibers of a muscle group as possible.  In order to do this, we need to circumvent our protective instincts to some extent.  We need to convince ourselves that what we are setting out to do is entirely volitional, expected, and even welcomed.  When we talk ourselves out of continuing our effort we succumb to what is known in physiology as the Voluntary Activation Deficit.  This means there’s a measurable difference between how much effort we could give versus the effort we actually give.  The more effort we voluntarily give, the more muscle fibers we are going to access and activate, which is known as motor unit recruitment (MUR).  This is important because a muscle fiber can only be stimulated if it is first activated.  We control this activation (recruitment) through our voluntary effort.
This concept of motor unit recruitment brings us back to our Purpose.  We need to be mentally engaged toward increasing our effort to the fullest extent possible.  Any doubts or distractions will only derail our efforts, and ultimately our results.  This helps explain why MSF has a climate controlled, distraction free environment, with constructive and actionable instruction from our trainers.  It facilitates the focus required to maximize your effort.  Pulling back the curtain a little, we can admittedly state that this level of focus is not required as a beginner.  This is because as a beginner, anything you do above the level of effort you are accustomed to will invoke a stimulus.  However, this is short lived and you will need to develop and progress your mental approach along the way, which our environment and supervision accommodates better than anyone.
Let us be your intuition…almost as though we are your copilot, guiding you toward continuous improvement in your exercise quality and intensity.  The more attentive you are to the real objective and to our instruction the more likely you are to make this an automatic behavior.  This can be a rewarding quest in other ways too as you will experience the benefit of being present, even if for only a handful of repetitions on an exercise.  You’ll also be creating an ability to persevere through a challenging physical endeavor.  This can create a more confident and capable mindset.  While this isn’t necessarily our specialty, it's safe to say that these skills can transfer to other areas of the real world.
So in bringing all of this together, walk through the studio doors intent on having a laser-like focus on the instruction from your trainer and the quality of your execution.  We will get you set with the correct Posture, lock it in place.  We will help you establish the ideal Pace, maintain it at all costs.  We will remind you to stay in a consistent movement Path, do not alter it.  You should view every workout, every set, and every rep as an opportunity to practice staying attentive to these 3 components.  And with these elements becoming more and more standardized, the fun part, the real challenge will be to add an unwavering intensity on top of this solid foundation.  When you begin to pay attention to the details and implement the instruction from your trainer and push harder at the right moment because you know it will make a difference, you will begin to increase your maximum tolerable perception of effort, and most importantly, you will continue to truly experience all of the benefits that productive strength training has to offer.