MSF MASTERY SERIES - Issue 6 - LOWER TURNAROUNDS
Continuing on with our Mastery Series, this month’s topic will focus on what we internally call the lower turnaround.  You may have heard us refer to it during your sessions but if that term is unfamiliar, just know that it is the change of direction between the lowering of the weight and the lifting.  So as you are lowering the weight, you then “turn around” and begin lifting.
Before we fully explore this particular attribute, let’s remind ourselves of why our Mastery Series is important, or should be at least, to our strength training.  If we are to receive a benefit from these workouts, then we have to get better at them as they come up.  When all of us first start our strength training journey, we have a sort of “beginner’s luck” that we can leverage where almost anything we do during our workouts will be stimulative (i.e. beneficial).  This is because almost anything we do in the workout will most likely be at a level of exertion that we are NOT accustomed to.  As a result, the body has to respond by increasing its level of strength and fitness.
But the more and more we exercise and the stronger we get, the less impactful the same level of effort will be in future workouts.  We must continually challenge ourselves to train better, and this includes training harder.  At the end of the day, we are trying to increase the number of muscle fibers we are activating (i.e. using) and the amount of tension they are subjected to.  And this comes about through effort.  But the effort cannot be random or haphazard or scattered.  It needs to be directed.  Specific muscular structures need to be loaded and kept under load for the duration of the set.  And as the difficulty increases, we must do everything in our power to keep the targeted muscles loaded while increasing our effort.
Which brings us to the lower turnaround.  This is likely the most challenging point in a single repetition on a given exercise.  The lower turnaround is often where we have the least favorable leverage, which adds to difficulty in performing them correctly.  This coupled with the fact that there seems to be additional discomfort in these positions as our muscles are in a somewhat lengthened or stretched state.  However, if we are to succeed in our journey of continued strength and progress, we must conquer and master the lower turnaround.
There are three simple rules to properly performing a lower turnaround:
Always bottom out
Do not unload at the bottom
Do not fire out of the bottom
Importantly, when we say the “bottom” we are referring to the point in the movement that corresponds with the weight stack lowering and touching or bottoming out.  Also note that there are some exercises where the weight stack may not touch, such as in a compound row or a pulldown.  In these exercises, the bottom is defined by the elbows straightening.  For most other movements, the weight stack should touch as you change directions.
THE THREE RULES OF THE LOWER TURNAROUND
Rule number one - always bottom out.  If you’ve trained with us for any amount of time, you’ve surely heard us instruct to allow for a ”soft touch” or to “barely touch, barely start” at the bottom.  And oftentimes we cannot see the weight stack as it is approaching this point.  This is by design.  This keeps us honest.  It forces an even higher level of focus to have to sense the exact moment that this occurs.  It also creates exponentially more tension because we are minimizing momentum, which requires the muscles to work harder.  But keep in mind, this is a good thing.  This is exactly what we are paying for from our workouts.  As noted above and throughout the Mastery Series, tension is the stimulus we are seeking.  Carefully lowering to just barely allow the weights to touch creates more tension than simply slamming them down or changing directions arbitrarily.  So be attentive to our instruction and really challenge yourself to barely let the weights touch on movements that require it.
Rule number two - do not unload.  It should go without saying that once we do allow the weights to touch softly, that we should not fully set them down or unload.  This obviates the entire purpose of strength training, to create tension.  But this also creates an instinctive battle that is hard to overcome.  It's extremely difficult to slowly lower a weight, in a fatigued state, and remain attentive enough to only permit a soft touch without setting it down entirely and resting.  As we’ve stated throughout the Mastery Series, consider every repetition of every workout as practice.  You are practicing your strength training.  There may not be a more worthwhile endeavor for humanity.
Rule number three - do not fire out.  As equally challenging as lowering and only allowing the lightest touch of the weights is the requirement to not “fire out” of the bottom.  This is all done with safety in mind first and foremost.  Any sort of sudden forces can be injurious.  We need to make sure we are pushing hard enough to change directions but not so hard that we introduce momentum.  Again, this will require substantially more work from the muscles to manage properly.  And there will be discomfort to overcome or at least minimize, but this discomfort is an inevitable byproduct of the tension.  Most people will mistake the discomfort they feel with an inability to continue with their effort.  This is where most will plateau.  They will reach a certain, individual level of discomfort and will decide not to push anymore.  Or even worse, they will decide to abruptly “fire out” of the bottom to get beyond the discomfort.  Instead, push JUST HARD ENOUGH to change direction, without momentum.
All of this takes practice, so don’t expect each turn to be perfect, but execute with an intention of making each one perfect.  The idea of “embracing the journey” has never been more applicable.  Challenge yourself to focus entirely on the instruction you are receiving and your execution in the moment.  Do not make this an emotional event for yourself.  You are training with MSF to create a stronger, more resilient human existence.  You must carry out the mission (workout) in a specific way to ensure the benefits.  With this in mind, the more you work on perfecting your technique and specifically the lower turnarounds, the more readily you will accept and appreciate the struggle involved.