MaxStrength Fitness Mastery Series - Issue 9 - Breathing
Well you wouldn’t think we would have to write about this latest topic.  After all, breathing is an involuntary activity that happens whether we want it to or not thanks to our autonomic nervous system.  But for some reason, we refuse to let nature take its course when we are exerting.  And even when prompted by our instructor to “breathe”, we decide to override this wise advice and do the opposite.  We bear down and hold our breath.  Now it's not entirely your fault…we are programmed to do exactly this as a protective mechanism.
You see, in the moment, holding our breath allows for a temporary increase in force production.  So why wouldn’t we take advantage of this?  Well there are a couple of reasons.  For one, and most importantly, this ValSalva maneuver as it is technically called can be potentially dangerous for those with certain pre-existing medical conditions, particularly those involving the heart, brain, or eyes.  It should be avoided at all costs.
Secondly, while a well timed ValSalva maneuver may get us through a more challenging part of a set of exercise (think bottom of the leg press), because we are sustaining a continuous effort we need to continuously breathe to support this effort.  This will keep us “in the running” as we like to say for a longer period of time as we are more likely to be able to keep up with the cardiovascular demands of the set.  Now for those of you that have been indoctrinated into proper training over the years might point out, while we are not necessarily looking for a longer set, we do want to be able to last long enough to create a stimulus.  And although it is not time dependent, if we quit or run out of breath before we are truly pushing hard enough (i.e. involuntary slowing) to create high levels of mechanical tension, it may not be a productive set.
One last reason to breathe continuously would be to avoid using more than just the required muscles to perform the given movement pattern.  By holding our breath, we tend to tense up other muscles to create more stability throughout the body.  While this does make us potentially stronger in that moment, we are also using our limited nervous system capacity to contract otherwise uninvolved muscles.  This limits the motor unit recruitment signal that could be sent to the intended target muscles resulting in a weaker and most likely insufficient stimulus.  So keep breathing and try not to turn every exercise into a full body, global effort.  This takes practice but with time you can unlock new levels of progress.
The next question might be, “how exactly should we breathe” or maybe “I feel like I am breathing, what am I doing wrong”?  The brief moments of breath holding almost always go unnoticed by the trainee.  They are often disguised by a rapid catch up period of over breathing.  Additionally, because they are more likely to happen during when greater effort is required and the trainee is under duress, they will be completely unaware of whether or not they are breathing.  For the record, any restriction of breathing goes against what we are suggesting.  Those of you that like to blow air are restricting your breathing.  Those that like to breathe through clenched teeth or pursed lips are also restricting your breathing.  And the most overtly improper technique of grunting, groaning, verbalizing, etc. is nothing more than holding your breath to gain a mechanical advantage.  It is not a sign of power or effort, but rather wasted energy that attempts to make the exercise easier.
Our challenge to you would be similar to all of the other Mastery Series topics.  Come to every workout with an intent on being more focused and attentive to our instruction.  When we suggest to you to “breathe more” as you are in the eccentric (lowering) phase headed toward and through the lower turn, make a conscious effort to do exactly that.  It won’t be easy and your muscles will have to work harder.  But that’s why we train.  And if we are going to train regularly, we might as well try and train better.
Another simple piece of advice might be to just avoid holding your breath.  While it may take more mental effort to think about how to breathe, maybe it makes more sense for you to just ensure you are not holding your breath.  Besides, most of us go through the other 23.5 hours of the day never once thinking about our breathing.  We just let it happen.  Well, that might be the best approach when training at MSF.  And just like the rest of our day, when we increase our effort, like walking faster, or going up stairs, our breathing will increase on its own.  We don’t need to think about it for it to happen.  Well the same applies with our training.  As your effort increases, so should your breathing.  Remember, we want to keep you safe first and foremost here at MSF but we also want you to continue to improve with your technique and your results.  As always, talk with your trainer about these topics and let's truly take control of our strength and longevity!