MaxStrength Fitness Mastery Series - Issue 8 - Effort
OK, so you’ve been following along with the MSF Mastery Series, and you’ve been implementing the previous topics to the best of your abilities, and you’ve noticed your workouts are beginning to feel different.  You feel more in control and intentional and you appreciate the challenge.  Well, if you’ve made it this far and are wondering what's next, we thank you for taking this journey as seriously as you should.  That alone will ensure your progress will be more than can be expected by simply “going through the motions”.  But please understand that merely “going through the motions” will also lead to a multitude of health benefits.  That’s what is so great about resistance training…the body doesn’t really have a choice when properly challenged.  It has to adapt when presented with a stimulus.  But for those looking for the next level of strength, resiliency, and longevity, you will need to become relentless in your training.  And that’s what we are here for.  We’re not only setting you up, keeping you safe, and tracking your sessions, but more importantly we are teaching you how to progressively train better, which is ultimately the most critical element of a strength training program.  The qualitative improvement of the execution of the exercises themselves.
The term “better” can be interpreted in many ways, so allow us to clarify.  Most people would assume that there is a quantitative measurement for a better workout.  Either more weight or more reps or our favorite…more machines.  But none of those are capable of measuring what really counts.  None of those measure the actual stimulus that causes an adaptive change in the body.  If it were that simple, our workouts could last all day and we would get more benefit than our bodies knew what to do with.  But that really only requires more time and time is not stimulative in terms of strength or muscularity.  It may work for fatigue resistance, otherwise known as endurance, but strength and muscle require a more precise stimulus.  They require a certain level of intensity or effort to cause an adaptation.  And for most of us, that is the hard part.
Our bodies are instinctively programmed to follow the path of least resistance.  As a result, we tend to find the easy way out in many physical endeavors.  This serves us well in potentially dangerous situations, acting as a protective, life-preserving mechanism.  Unfortunately, this also limits our efforts during a workout.  Our bodies do not know the difference between a challenging set of exercise or a life threatening situation.  But the good news is that this ability can be cultivated and enhanced through practice.  Our bodies/brains will get more tolerant and accepting of this higher level of effort.  With more attentive and intentional sets of exercise comes more stimulative and beneficial workouts.  With more attentive and intentional sets of exercise comes more strength, more resiliency, and longevity.
So how do we get there?  We come to our sessions with the seriousness required of a life and death situation.  While this may seem like a dramatic overstatement, when you genuinely work at this, you will begin to understand the comparison.  Now, this is not meant to scare anyone away, because remember, this ability can be developed.  See this as the “wake up call” that we alluded to in the Mastery Series Introductory article.  But it takes practice.  For starters, consider the following: instead of ruminating on the discomfort, focus on keeping your posture, your pace, and your path.  Plant a seed in your subconscious that the struggle you are enduring is directly attributable to the benefits you seek.  They are one in the same.  Try and “allow” the discomfort for just one moment longer in each successive set of exercise.  By keeping your attention fixated on your posture, pace, and path, you will engrain a more productive mindset.  You will no longer talk yourself out of the hard part.  The important part.  You may even begin to thrive in these situations.  We plan on training this way for the rest of our lives and we hope you will be right there with us along the way.
By focusing our attention on external factors, we can expect to become more robotic and less emotional.  We can actually practice being more present, which apparently is something we could all use more of anyway.  Let the workout become that for you.  Now the most important external factor when it comes to training harder is without a doubt, maintaining your PACE!  Yes, we move “slowly” here at MSF.  You’ll notice slowly is in quotes.  That’s because speed is relative.  Our pace isn’t necessarily slow, especially when you are training with a high level of effort.  You’ll soon find that while we appear to be moving slowly to the average onlooker, internally we are pushing pretty darn hard.  Hard enough that you would expect the weight (or movement arm of the machine) to be moving faster.  And this is where the magic happens.  Ideally we will reach a point in our set of exercise where the machine will begin to “bog down” or slow down on us, despite our greatest effort to maintain our pace.  This is precisely the point in the set where our muscle fibers are experiencing a level of tension that is stimulative.  This basically means our muscles are working hard enough to invoke the physiological stimulus we seek.  We need to make a voluntary decision to push harder when the movement arm we are pushing against begins to involuntarily slow down on us.  Read that last sentence again.  Think about what it's really saying.  If it isn’t clear now, don’t worry, just keep coming to your sessions prepared to learn and improve (Kaizen!).  We will help to simplify the science.
All of these Mastery Series articles are essentially leading to the point made above.  They are all a piece of the same puzzle.  And if we as a species are to reap the benefits of what has been rightly termed “The Fountain of Youth” we need to look beyond the simple recommendations provided in the articles and posts that commonly come our way.  In order for this stuff to actually work, it has to be done in a truly productive manner.  And more importantly over time, it has to trend with an increasingly higher level of intensity.  Now, because of this, it doesn’t get easier but you will find that you become more accepting of the struggle.  You have made the connection to the benefits you have and will continue to receive for your efforts.  You will feel more sense of purpose and accomplishment from these endeavors and you will begin to fully embody this most challenging way of training.  You may even begin to notice the physical prowess and mental clarity that come through regular bouts of exertion.  As we’ve stated throughout this Series, we are here to guide you.  That’s essentially what you are paying us for and we are excited to show you the way!  Be forewarned however, this will become addicting.  You can thank us later…welcome to the club.