MaxStrength Fitness Mastery Series - Issue 2 - PACE
The next topic in our MSF Mastery Series is Pace.  But being that this is a cumulative series, we must not forget our first topic, Posture.  Everything starts with Posture and this needs to be our foundation as we add new concepts to master.
Pace is probably more synonymous with our protocol than any other descriptor that comes to mind.  In fact if you asked the entire MSF family to describe our training in one sentence, there’s a good chance that sentence would include the words “moving slowly,” or something to that effect.  And while they’re technically not wrong, there’s a good chance that they’re missing a critical component of this tenet.
Let’s look into why that might be and more importantly why that matters.
When new trainees are first introduced to our style of training at MSF, there is a preoccupation with slowing down movement.  This is because our bodies are inherently intensity adverse and as a protective measure will speed up movement to make the task easier.  It's as if we are programmed to instinctively find the path of least resistance.  So if we are to override this mechanism, we need to hyperfixate on slowing down our speed.
But what our focus should really be on is maintaining a CONSISTENT pace.  So while moving slowly is important, it is better described as moving smoothly.  To not change speeds.  And as a reminder, that speed can be between 6 to 10 seconds in each direction, as long as the concentric and eccentric are the same.
As an aside, there are benefits to moving closer to the 6 seconds than the 10, but that will depend on the individual and the exercise.  Just know that if your trainer is having you speed up, just speed up SLIGHTLY.  It will probably be more than enough, but it matters.  We are trying to optimize your training and your results.  And as long as we are exaggerating our control of the lower turnaround, it’s almost impossible to go too fast (let your trainer guide you).
What’s more important than the actual speed however, is the ability to intently focus on maintaining ONE CONTINUOUS PACE.  And here’s where the hidden meaning to this approach comes into play.  The sort of “silver bullet” for productive resistance training.
While we are encouraged to maintain our pace, we cannot and should not expect our EFFORT to remain constant.  In other words, if we are to maintain a given pace in an activity with increasing fatigue, our effort needs to voluntarily increase to counter that fatigue.  This is how stimulative mechanical tension is created.  This is what makes resistance training effective.
In this way, Pace governs effort.  As you sense your movement bogging down, push harder to keep your pace.  There’s a point in the set where you will notice that you are no longer moving slowly because we’re supposed to move slowly.  You’re moving slowly because you are beginning to fatigue and have not yet begun to voluntarily push harder.  It’s not enough to move slowly until we can no longer move slowly or because we can no longer tolerate the discomfort.  And while we’re on the topic of discomfort, by focusing instead on our pace, it may help us get beyond these adverse feelings that often lead to us ending our sets prematurely.
So don’t think slow…think smooth and continuous.  Begin to become more aware of when you are bogging down.  You’ll be the first to know.  More importantly, let that be your cue to shift gears and begin pushing harder.  Focus on keeping your pace.  And by all means, lean on your trainer for help, that’s what we’re here for!