MSF Mastery Series - Issue 10 - Putting it All Together (The Physiology of Strength)
So if you’ve made it this far in the MSF Mastery Series, to our 10th and final edition, we thank you.  You will make our job easier and more rewarding.  Chances are you have become more knowledgeable on and interested in the topic of strength training.  You’ve likely become more receptive to our instruction and as a result, you see it as more meaningful and your workouts are now more productive.  And while we’re calling it our final edition, it’s really just the final for now.  There will certainly be other topics to discuss and even revisions of older ones as we gain new insights and perspectives on strength training.  If this is the first one you are reading, welcome, but we would suggest you start with the first one and read through sequentially.  While each topic does address a stand alone quality, it would make sense from an implementation perspective to start at the beginning.  Our intent was to introduce one topic at a time and then work to put that topic to use for the month so it becomes more automatic.  The next topic would then be added to the previous, which is already ingrained (or at least well on its way).
Because what we do here at MSF is so drastically different, we thought it would be a good idea to give a little more insight into the science behind how resistance training works and how the body responds to the stimulus.  Most of the commonly held beliefs about working out directly oppose our methodology and it’s almost hard to believe that the general consensus could be so wrong.  You’ve probably shared the idea of our approach with family and friends and were almost certainly met with confusion or disbelief.  We know, we struggle with that every day in our introduction to prospective clients.  So that’s what inspired this latest volume of the Mastery Series.  Let this arm you with a little more knowledge and at the same time provide you with even more reassurance that what you are doing is the best thing you can do from a physical measure outside of medical intervention!
It makes sense though, that most people would think that what they believe about strength training is factual.  We’ve relied on faulty beliefs and “bro science” for decades.   And while there is a ton of detail to consider for an understanding of human physiology, we believe it can all be supported by a simple framework.  At least in terms of our protocol and how to implement it in the most optimal way.  And in this case that simple framework consists of the physiological mechanisms that create responses, or stimuli, in the body.  These are some of the things that will be discussed throughout this issue.
The Common Beliefs
So in establishing a framework, a good place to start is to dispel some of the more commonly held beliefs about strength training.  For one, those with a surface level orientation to strength training will tell you that muscle is built by first being torn down and then rebuilt stronger.  This is often the only requirement proclaimed for building muscle.  In stating this most popular attribute, they are missing the two other mechanisms that are commonly stated as fact by the more well studied coaches, trainers, or physiologists.  Those two other avenues to muscle building would be, metabolic stress and mechanical tension.  So here we have it, the three ways to build muscle that has been passed around for decades:
Muscle damage
Metabolic stress
Mechanical tension
And the result of having these three mechanisms available for muscle building is that most of the workouts and strategies have been designed to encapsulate all three.  Why not, right?  It would seem to make sense that the more poles we have in the water so to speak, the better the chance we have at achieving results.  The more muscle we should build and the faster we should build that muscle.
Because the variety mechanisms discussed above were accepted as not only true but required for building muscle, typical workout strategies would include excessive volume in an effort to capture all of the potential benefits.  They would have multiple sets of the same exercises and multiple exercises per muscle group to create the coveted soreness or damage.  They would also include high reps for the metabolic stress “finisher” or “burn” that we’re all so familiar with.  And for the last one, mechanical tension, many would want to also include some heavier sets.  So when you add all that up, you have quite a lot of volume.  Way too much really, and it’s not only unnecessary but detrimental as the fatigue created from that amount of work will most certainly diminish the benefits.
What We Know to be True
Now that we know the common beliefs and how those may have shaped the traditionally prescribed workout protocols, let’s take a look at what we now know to be true and how that changes things.  First and foremost, there is only one driver of hypertrophy…Mechanical Tension.  The other mechanisms were disproved by testing each one in the absence of mechanical tension and observing the results.  In either case, damaging a muscle or injecting it with metabolites, there was no addition or growth of muscle tissue.  In the case of muscle damage, the hormonal response is similar to that from a workout but the net effect is simply to clear the resulting inflammation from the damage and repair the muscle fiber to its original state.  And when a muscle is injected with lactic acid for example, there is no muscular growth.  These are both side effects of training but not stimuli for growth.  Only with mechanical tension is muscular growth stimulated.
So at this point, you might be wondering, what exactly is mechanical tension and how does it lead to building muscle (i.e. hypertrophy)?  Mechanical tension is a physical pulling force experienced by individual muscle fibers.  Muscle fibers overlap when they contract and this is accomplished by the actin and myosin filaments sliding over top of each other, or overlapping.  In other words, muscles “pull” on bones to move them when they contract and this pulling force is what creates mechanical tension.  Technically, mechanical tension will be present in any muscular contraction performed by the body.  But if we are lifting a cup of coffee and therefore producing mechanical tension, is that really going to make us stronger or build muscle?
The answer to that question is obviously ‘no’.  So then how does mechanical tension actually lead to hypertrophy?  The key to this most important question lies in something known as the force-velocity relationship of skeletal muscle.  Simply stated, as the velocity of movement decreases, the force that can be produced increases.  There is an inverse relationship.  So lifting a relatively heavy weight slowly (low velocity) requires a more maximal force.  Importantly however, this low velocity movement has to be involuntarily slow.  Here are a couple of ways to conceptualize this:
The speed of movement of the machine one is lifting begins to slow down despite the effort to maintain the pace or accelerate.  Think about the footplate on a leg press and how it “bogs down” on us as we’re fatiguing.  If we cannot lift it any faster, we will have a higher level of mechanical tension present.
It is more simply stated as training to or near muscular failure, which for our purposes happens at concentric failure.  In other words, the reps closest to the end of a set tend to slow down until we can no longer lift the weight.  And while many believe that failure occurs when the involved muscles are fully “fatigued” or “torn down”, that is not the case.  This is another fallacy that was never linked to a mechanism.  Instead, we reach our maximum tolerable perception of effort via a protective signal sent to the brain.  This can be a topic for a future volume in the Mastery Series for anyone that may want to know more!
The slower movement results from a slower contraction velocity in the muscle.  Because of this slow velocity, the muscle fiber components stay attached longer rather than pulling and releasing almost instantly as occurs in faster movements.  By hanging on longer, there are more connections made, which creates a greater pulling force from the muscle.  And this higher level of pulling force is what creates the potential for stimulative levels of mechanical tension in the active muscle fibers.  That last part is critical and it is a foundational concept to understanding the physiology of strength training.  And that is that a muscle fiber cannot be stimulated until it is first activated by a signal sent from the central motor command of the brain.  This is known as motor unit recruitment (MUR) and the magnitude of our MUR is governed by our effort.  The greater the effort the greater the MUR.  And one of the more interesting ideas in resistance training is that our highest possible levels of MUR can be increased with progressively higher levels of effort over time.  So we can increase our upper limit.  Read those last two sentences again!  In fact this must happen if we are to keep making progress.  The take home here is that in an indirect way, the whole purpose of training is to become better at training; to become more tolerant of training; and to get a better effect from training.
In considering all of the above, we can now have a better understanding of why excessive volume, soreness, muscle damage, high reps, etc. are not only unnecessary but detrimental to the results we seek.  As mentioned above, the fatigue caused from all of those typical workout attributes compete for resources with the muscle building stimulus.  There will be a lot more to discuss on this topic too if you are interested.  The critical component to understanding this is that once we create the stimulus, more reps/sets/tension will not necessarily lead to a larger stimulus.  Once a muscle is stimulated, it would be best to move onto training another muscle group.