MSF MASTERY SERIES - Issue 7 - Squeeze Technique
Hopefully by now, you’ve begun to implement some of the training insight that we’ve reintroduced through our MSF Mastery Series.  The topics covered thus far are considered to be some of the foundational tenants of proper resistance training.  If someone were to strength train for a portion of their lives with any amount of dedication, we might expect these to become automatic.  But in order for that to happen they must first be known about and practiced with intent.  Without these firmly engrained as habits, our progress is likely to be significantly limited.  That’s why we urge you to come to each and every session with a qualitative mindset and a focus on the details.  Which brings us to our next, and quite possibly most detailed topic yet in the Series, the “Squeeze” Technique.
If you have been listening to your trainer, you’ve undoubtedly heard them instruct you to “squeeze” on an exercise.  But have you actually been squeezing?  And in the manner that we would expect?  And with the level of attention required to continue to ensure safety and progress?  And what about after the squeeze…how do we resume the movement?  Let’s attempt to answer all of these questions and more as we shed a little light on this often overlooked element of a set of exercise.
First and foremost, let’s establish what a squeeze actually is and why we would perform one.  When we instruct you to squeeze, we are looking for you to continue the contraction of the targeted muscle (not the hands).  Another way to think of it is to attempt to continue the movement without producing any external positional change.  In other words, once you’ve reached the full range of motion on a repetition, you can continue to apply more force so that the muscle will contract harder without further movement.  Take for instance, the leg extension.  Once the knees are extended as straight as they will go, you cannot straighten them any further.  However, what can be done is to ATTEMPT to continue to straighten them further.  This will result in a stronger contraction of the thigh muscles.  Importantly, this harder contraction in and of itself may not make for a more meaningful stimulus. So why bother?
The benefits that come from implementing and mastering the squeeze technique are both immediate and long-term.  The squeeze creates another level of control required to display competency and ability to use the weight selected.  If you cannot properly squeeze the targeted muscle(s) on an exercise that requires it, then you may not be ready to use that amount of weight.  The squeeze becomes a proving ground where it is impossible to use a weight that would be considered excessive.  If you cannot exaggerate your control with a given weight on a given exercise, you have more work to do to progress.  And that’s a good thing.  Remember, this is a lifelong endeavor of mastery.
In addition to the control and the resulting safety that a proper squeeze requires, there is a benefit to simply being aware of the targeted muscle(s).  This will help not only on the current repetition but even more so by increasing motor unit recruitment in the long term.  We’ve discussed motor unit recruitment in previous months’ lessons, and the importance of improving this through effort as we progress.  This is important, you’ll remember, because unless a muscle fiber is active and contributing to a movement, it will not receive a benefit.  By feeling a muscle and having an awareness of what we are targeting, we can increase the active number of muscle fibers.  You receive more bang for your exercise buck so to speak.
Once you are in the squeeze position, and hopefully increasing your effort/force in an attempt to contract the muscle harder (i.e. squeezing), you then need to consider how to come out of that position.  If you’ve been with MSF for any period of time you’ve likely been instructed to “ease out” following the click.  Well, there is a lot more involved in this command than there may appear.  Since we are in a static/stationary position of increasing effort, when our trainer ‘clicks’, we cannot yet resume movement.  Our momentary effort is well above that which would permit us to begin lowering the weight.  We must first carefully reduce our effort, while in the squeeze, to a level that is low enough that we can slowly begin to lower the weight with control. There is a necessary delay to gradually come out of the contracted position.  If we are able to move immediately upon hearing the click, then we were probably not squeezing to begin with.
Which brings us to the point of this latest installment of the Mastery Series, the details matter.  Or at least they should matter.  The instruction your trainer provides is meant to guide you to become better at training.  As mentioned before, this could very well be the most important skill you learn.  So pay attention to the details and challenge yourself to be more precise with your training.  Be gradual on your load ups.  Be continuous on your turns.  And be determined on your squeezes.  Determined to ease into the contracted position, contract as hard as you can, and gradually “unsqueeze” as you slowly resume your movement.
One last point about the squeeze technique, it is important to note that it only occurs on certain exercises.  And it is helpful to know what muscles you are targeting so that you can better focus on contracting them.  This has always been and will always be a point of emphasis at MSF.  Your trainer will guide you, just be present enough to receive the instruction and willing enough to implement it to the best of your ability.