MaxStrength Fitness Mastery Series - Issue 3 - PATH
Before we discuss this month’s topic for the MSF Mastery Series, let’s remind ourselves that we should continue to build upon our understanding of the previous two installments, Posture and Pace.  No amount of strength training will matter without first establishing a rigid, unwavering Posture and combining it with a smooth and continuous Pace.  As always, your trainer will reinforce these concepts…just make sure you are attentive to their instruction and doing everything in your power to implement.
Our current installment of Mastery will focus on a topic we call Path.
In this context, Path refers to the plane of motion, or movement pattern that is performed during an exercise.  More specifically, we are referring to the actual act of moving the arms, legs, torso, or head on a given machine and the resulting path that they follow.  Because the body automatically detects and recruits the muscles with the best leverage at a given joint angle, the Path we use will determine which muscle fibers are targeted.  This is known as neuromechanical matching and it really matters when attempting to create a stimulative effect.
Now on certain machines, the Path may not be able to be varied much…and that’s a good thing.  The more locked in or restrained we are, the more we are forced to maintain a consistent path, creating a more consistent loading of the muscles we are intending to target.  For those that have used the lumbar or lower back machine, this is a good example of keeping a consistent path.  It’s almost impossible to vary the path of the movement.  This ensures a better chance that an exercise will be stimulative (i.e. effective) because we are not shifting the effort or tension around.  Tension needs to remain on the same muscle fibers throughout an exercise in order to reach a high enough threshold.  And “high enough” for our purposes would be more tension than those muscle fibers have previously experienced.
But for many exercises, especially upper body movements, the limb’s Path will be a determining factor in the leverage that a particular muscle fiber has at a given joint position.  We do not want to shift that leverage around as that will only act to unload muscle fibers that we are intending to keep loaded.
Let's consider the compound row as an example.  If we begin a set by carrying the elbows out wide relative to the torso (abducted) and then begin to tuck the elbows closer to the torso as we fatigue (adduct), we are essentially performing a different exercise.  And by changing the movement pattern, there’s a good chance that we are not fully stimulating any muscle fibers, essentially missing out on any benefit.  Even though we will still feel as though we have done something we cannot fool our physiology.
This is one of the more challenging aspects of proper training for a newer trainee to overcome.  Instinctively our bodies will attempt to find the path of least resistance.  We find ourselves operating under the premise of the assumed objective…to keep the machine moving as long as possible. In order to do this, we need to unload what is fatiguing or uncomfortable and transfer the effort to other muscles.
In order for resistance training to be effective, we need to learn to overcome this instinctive measure to shift and be consistent with our Path of execution.  When the trainer instructs “elbows out” we need to keep our elbows out, and maintain that same path.  This is a simple premise but it is not easy to implement.  But this is the “practice” or challenge of the workout that will keep us engaged for a lifetime.  And more importantly, this challenge to Master of proper resistance training will keep us progressing toward a more optimized human experience!