MaxStrength Fitness Mastery Series - Issue 5 - The Gradual Load Up
With the Four P’s of Strength Training now established, let’s get a little more granular and begin to look at the nuts and bolts of our exercise execution.  Before we do that however, let’s remind ourselves of the framework established by our Four P’s:
Posture - how we are positioned and braced during a movement.
Pace - the speed we are moving at any given moment in a set.
Path - the plane of motion our bodies travel through on an exercise.
Purpose - the real objective of resistance training.  To subject as many muscle fibers to as much tension as we can create in that moment.
These are non-negotiable attributes of proper strength training and we must continue to cultivate our awareness of these if we’re ever going to make this a worthy, lifelong journey.  Remember, your trainer is here to help you.  It is what we are instructing you to do, moment to moment during your exercise here at MSF.
So let’s now add to that framework our first specific element of training in our Mastery Series, the gradual load up.  Now this will likely have been one of the first things you were challenged with during your consultation, but chances are, you’ve forgotten about it.  You would have been instructed to “gradually load up” or “slowly begin” on the Leg Press.  But you were also instructed to do a dozen or so other things during the consult.  And you are continually instructed to do dozens of other things during your workouts to the extent that the load up just seems to blend in to everything else.
But this is a chance to step back and consider this task in isolation, away from the anticipation of having to lift a heavy load and endure the struggle of the set.  The load up is where a set of exercise truly begins.  It's where the rubber meets the road so to speak.  Left to our own devices (our instincts), our body will try and find the path of least resistance.  This was discussed during the Four P’s series and here it is again.  It seems our intuition is always at odds with our instincts.  And if we’re not intentional, if we’re not receptive to instruction, our instincts will win every time.  Without fail, we will hold our breath and heave into the load suddenly.  This will almost always be followed by the explanation, “I just wanted to make sure I could lift it.”  Keep this in mind, if you cannot lift the load properly, it is the instructor’s fault, not yours.
Now, it's not as though a sudden load up is useless, or will not provide results, it will.  But there are potential safety concerns if it becomes habitual.  Remember at the end of the day, our body is responding to the amount or magnitude of mechanical tension experienced by the targeted muscles fibers.  It does not respond to the magnitude of the load we are using or the number of reps we achieve.  With this in mind, we want to focus on creating the highest amount of tension we can in the greatest number of targeted muscle fibers we can, all while keeping our joints safe.  Well, this starts the moment we begin to apply pressure to the movement arm.
As the name implies, a gradual load up needs to happen gradually.  This is different than slowly.  Slowly refers to the speed at which we are moving.  Gradual indicates a graded or incrementally increasing effort.  So when instructed to gradually begin an exercise, think about what that means and how to go about doing exactly that.  There needs to be a starting point where we begin to apply pressure with a slight enough effort that there is no movement yet.  From there we need to build our force evenly until it reaches a point where it is just greater than the selected load.  This is when the weight stack will begin to lift.  Depending on the magnitude of the load, this can take anywhere from 2 to 6 seconds.
Think about that.  We need to knowingly begin to push without any movement occurring and begin to build from there.  Another way to think of it is as though you are trying to find the minimum level of force required to lift a weight.  So if there were 100 pounds on the weight stack, we are trying to gradually find 101 pounds of pressure.  That is a gradual load up.  And that is not easy.  It is also not an instinctively comfortable feeling.  This can be overridden however with attentiveness and practice.  So next time you are set to begin an exercise, listen for the instruction to “gradually begin to apply pressure” and think back to this installment of the Mastery Series.  Challenge yourself to do exactly that…to gradually apply pressure.  Notice the difference in the feeling that is produced.  It won’t necessarily feel comfortable but it should feel productive.  And you can be assured that you are on the right track to achieving all the benefits that strength training has to offer, before any movement has even occurred.