General Recommendations for Programming and Progression
Novice Level Trainees
The first session or consultation is where we present the Preliminary Considerations and introduce the leg press and one other additional exercise, usually overhead press or compound row.
Refer to the leg press script for the introduction of the MSF Protocol to the subject.
Once the subject has been introduced to the leg press it becomes easier to learn a compound upper body exercise (or any exercise for that matter).
During the client’s second session, a third exercise will be added and these three exercises MAY be performed twice to help speed up the learning curve, depending on the clients proficiency.  If they are slow to grasp the concepts or intensity adverse, it may help to perform the exercises twice in the initial workout or two.  If they are quick learners, the trainer may add a fourth and fifth exercise and only perform one set of each.  Of course these single sets will be closer to a maximum effort and thus the reason for only performing one set (i.e. our protocol).  If the overhead press was introduced during the consultation, the compound row would usually be the exercise added for the second workout.
This four/five-exercise workout may be repeated for several subsequent sessions if the instructor determines it necessary to engrain the basic qualitative concepts.
Beginners are allowed and expected to have a higher rep count (8 to 12) as the weights should be light enough to facilitate learning. They need to be able to exaggerate their control on every exercise. Especially the changes of direction. This takes a lifetime to master so we may start with a somewhat lighter load to begin to learn the control required.
For this reason, the beginner workout will likely be longer than an intermediate or advanced level workout, lasting upwards of 30 minutes.
If the subject appears to be grasping the fundamentals accordingly, the instructor can begin to build their A routine over the next few workouts and ultimately introducing exercises for the B routine.