General Recommendations for Programming and Progression
Workout Progressions
Instructors will frequently field questions from clients regarding plateaus in exercise progression.  As most exercise enthusiasts realize, progression has a limit but almost no one has yet completely reached it when you take into account the following considerations.
At the outset of the MaxStrength Fitness program, an increase in weight or repetitions or both should be expected.  But it is important that the instructor be able to have ongoing intelligent and informative discussions with a client that these factors cannot and will not continue forever.  And that the qualitative elements of the workout should be the singular focus as this practice will lead to deeper levels of fatigue and a more meaningful stimulus.
The following factors should be considered for workout progression and are listed in order from the highest priority to the lowest priority:
Form – the quality of execution of the rep/set is the most important factor to improve upon before anything else in the workout is considered.
Sequence of exercises - needs to follow a logical order where there are no conflicting movement patterns and complementary pairings are considered:
Conflicting Movement Patterns:
Lumbar and Leg Press should NOT be run contiguously in any arrangement. The fatigue from the Lumbar exercise will interfere with the execution of the LP. LP requires a certain amount of trunk flexion and there will likely be some discomfort experienced from having worked the low back immediately before. At the same time, performing the LP immediately before Lumbar will cause some discomfort from locking down the legs and pelvis.
Lumbar into Leg Curl should be avoided as the fatigue from the Lumbar movement will only be increased by the trunk extension required of the LC.
Repetition count – if a subject has yet to reach muscular fatigue/failure and is still within an acceptable rep count range, the number of reps should be progressed in an effort to approach failure, before resistance is added.
Resistance – weight increases are only considered after the previous four factors are optimized