General Recommendations for Programming and Progression
Workout Programming Considerations
As mentioned throughout this manual, most clients/trainees will benefit from the exact same or similar programming. This is because physiologically speaking, the human body is essentially the same across the species. Aside from limb length differences, postural asymmetries, and slight variations in muscle attachment locations (creating differing internal moment arms), our muscular architecture is remarkably similar. Especially when considered for purposes of effective resistance training.
Because of this, most trainees will benefit from a basic foundational program that is known as a "generic" routine or "the big 5". This program consists of a horizontal push and pull (so chest press and compound row), a vertical push and pull (overhead press and pulldown), and a leg press. These five exercises alone will target (and therefore stimulate) most of the major muscular structures of the body, especially for newer trainees. As a subject gets more advanced, a more specialized selection of targeted exercises should be considered including single joint or unilateral movements. And as discussed below, subjects with certain orthopedic issues will benefit from other, more specific exercises.
Where to Begin...?
Most clients will be introduced to the Leg Press and at least one other exercise during the consultation. The other exercise will most likely be an upper body pulling movement (preferably compound row). These exercises are selected for their relative simplicity to learn and they address a multitude of muscular structures because of their compound nature. Keep in mind, compound exercises are linear movement patterns that act on more than one joint in the body.
In special cases, a new client that has a problematic or compromised joint or area of the body may alternatively be introduced to a more targeted exercise. For instance, someone with lower back issues may be given the lumbar machine during the consultation to highlight the therapeutic nature of resistance training and our protocol. It should go without saying that in this situation the instructor must be cautious in selecting the resistance and range of motion to ensure the safety of our clients, which is really what is expected in all situations at MSF.
After the client has completed their consultation and they return for their first workout, there's not necessarily a "best" course of action. The most sensible balance we should be seeking in a program would begin with selecting exercises from basic categories. The following table illustrates these basic categories and the exercises that are included in each:
From the highest, most broadly considered perspective, a client with a clear medical history and the goal of being functionally stronger would probably be best to eventually have an exercise from each category in a given workout. Or at least have each category represented through the weekly or rotational volume. So for instance if the client has been with us for several months and has an A and B rotation of workouts, each category would be represented at least once across both workouts with the first three categories most likely appearing in each workout. The first three categories (upper body - pull, upper body - push, and legs) can be seen as foundational and containing the "generic" routine exercises discussed above. For this reason, these three categories should most likely be included in every workout with the balance of exercises coming from the trunk and/or hip categories as needed for each specific client situation.
Case Study Examples:
A 65 year old client with a knee replacement and knee pain looking to remain as active as possible as they age. In this situation, we would definitely consider including a combination of the leg curl, along with leg press or leg extension in a majority if not all of the workouts. They would also most certainly benefit from hip and lumbar exercises as these tend to be areas of concern for the aging population. The remainder of the program would be comprised of the upper body push and pull exercises. This would constitute a well rounded, full body program that addresses the client's major concerns.
A 55 year old golf enthusiast with back pain looking to continue golfing as long as possible. As we have now learned a stronger golfer is a better golfer, just as a stronger gardener is a better gardener. That is to say the general quality of strength makes one better (i.e. more efficient or more capable) at anything. So in this case, we simply want to make the client generally stronger with a program that includes upper/lower push and pull along with lower body exercises. But more specifically in this case, the client would most likely benefit from a focused attention to their spine and core. Consider rotating between lumbar, abdominal, and torso rotation to better develop balanced strength in muscles that have been asymmetrically used in their sport/hobby.
An ectomorphic (lean/slender) 30 year old looking to be more muscular. In this case, this client might be better served to perform the "generic" or "big 5" routine for as long as possible. As discussed above, this program targets the most muscle over each of the five movement patterns. After some time, the instructor may add in the lateral raise and some direct, single joint arm exercises. Someone looking to be generally more muscular wouldn't necessarily benefit from more functional exercises such as hip abd/add or lumbar, at least from an aesthetic perspective. That is not to say that these movements should never be included, eventually they should. But if we're looking to deliver results in this situation, then the exercises described will lead to the most favorable results. And in this situation, we're not doing a disservice by not including the other exercises as the exercises we are performing will build overall, general strength.
A 78 year old grand parent with hip pain and balance concerns that wants to keep up with their grandchildren. Again, building general strength is going to help this individual the most so we will include exercises from the first three categories without question. But with balance concerns and their given age, there should be a consideration to include a consistent regimen of hip exercises, both abd and add, along with strengthening the core with lumbar and abdominal exercises.
A 40 year old recently recovering from a shoulder surgery. In this case, there may be a contraindication to performing any upper body exercises at all. As exercise practitioners we need to inform our clients that they can still train the other muscles of the body if they have an injury or are recovering from a surgical procedure. So for this client, we would just perform all lower body exercises to at least keep that area strong. There are not many situations that would keep a client away from their workouts with us for any extended period of time.
Please see the following document for further examples of programming considerations:
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1DUElWxIPNi3878BL0a4PSBSAzLcr491_E9WXExyZqEQ/edit?usp=drive_link
Upper Body - Pull | Upper Body - Push | Lower Body (Legs) | Trunk/Spine/Core | Hips
Compound Row
Pulldown
Pullover
Simple Row
Rear Delt
Biceps Curl
Scapular Retraction | Chest Press
Overhead Press
Lateral Raise
Chest Flye
Seated Dip
Triceps Extension | Leg Press
Leg Extension
Leg Curl
Calf Exercise | Lumbar Extension
Cervical Extension
Abdominal
Torso Rotation | ABduction
ADduction