Introduction
A Quick Word Before We Begin
A majority of the content throughout this manual will serve to provide a conceptual framework behind our methodology...basically informing us of the "why" behind everything. As with any area of study, having a sound understanding of the concepts involved will facilitate the application, or the "how". In other words, if you understand what we're trying to accomplish with our protocol and why, you will be better equipped to instruct and teach our clients while providing a safer and more meaningful experience.
Having said that, the most fruitful path to becoming a top level MaxStrength Fitness Life Transformer will be a combination of reading, shadowing, training (i.e. working out), and hands-on practice (equipment set up and instruction). Now there is no specific order or formula to these elements as each individual will benefit from a different combination but it will be in your best interest to continuously cycle through these as you progress through the on-boarding process. Even as you begin supervising your own sessions it would be in your best interest to continue to study the material in the Academy and elsewhere. The learning process does not stop once we begin training clients. The reading will make more sense once you've done some shadowing and the shadowing and reading will make more sense once you've experienced the hands-on training and vice versa.
The MaxStength Fitness Leadership Team will help guide you through these initial phases and will be with you throughout your career. We will continually strive to become the foremost experts in strength training as we look to deliver the most efficient, effective, and safe resistance exercise program available. We will pride ourselves on attentive, meaningful, and concise instruction based on a well informed understanding of the physiology of strength training. This is truly what separates us from other trainers in the industry and will continue to be our competitive advantage!
A glossary of terms follows in the next step as a high level introduction to some of the language used in the Academy and in our day to day practice as instructors. This next step will also serve as a quick reference guide to help understand the terms as you go through the on-boarding process.