Introduction
Random Training Notes, Observations, and FAQ's
One of the biggest challenges we will face as Exercise Practitioners at MSF is attempting to explain to someone what we do and to convince them that it is “enough” activity to be a complete strength training program.  This will likely not be an issue when we have them in the studio for a consultation.  They will get to try the workout firsthand, which is usually enough to get the point across.  The challenge will be for those that call in to inquire or for those conversations we find ourselves in outside of the studio.  For this reason, it helps to have a bit of a script prepared and to remember a few key selling points.  Our brand script is a very useful tool in these situations: “We help men and women reverse the aging process in only 20 minutes twice a week without breaking a sweat. Because everyone deserves to be healthy, fit and strong without wasting hours in the gym”!  You’ll notice that in these two sentences we have highlighted the main benefits of the protocol.  There are certain features of the protocol that help further explain what we do, like continuous tension, slow, controlled movement, high intensity effort, temperature controlled room, specialized equipment specific to our protocol, one on one expert trainers, etc.  But it is important to lead with the benefits, that’s what will matter most to prospective clients.
Quite possibly the most important skill that an Exercise Practitioner can have as they master their craft, would be the ability to communicate.  Now, it should go without saying that being an empathetic listener is critical in making that human connection with our clients too.  But in most cases, the communication will go one way during the workout - from Instructor to client (or at least it should).  And that communication needs to be something other than discussing the Instructor's personal life or counting reps or duration of squeezes or "cheerleading".  Yes there is a place for well timed encouragement but it should always be at a reasonable volume and done with a calm delivery.
The communication referred to here would be that which conveys the value of the workout.  Read that last sentence again.  We need to develop the ability to discuss the details of our protocol in a way that is direct, concise, actionable, and value added. In other words, our clients need to be beyond convinced that we are passionate and knowledgeable about resistance training and our enthusiasm needs to come through our instruction.  And it shouldn't feel forced or be overtly demonstrative.  It should be genuine, organic, and conversational…eventually.  The “conversation” is the actionable instruction and internal guidance we are providing.  Both external and internal cues.  Our clients are paying us for our words. The MSF Exercise Practitioner should be diligent in pursuing mastery of their craft - communication. Most of what an Instructor might want to say during a session in the form of instruction can be found throughout the MSF Academy and our Equipment Scripts. And because of this, the instructor should continually refer back to these resources to further equip their experience with insight.
Importantly, we need to acknowledge that some of our clients will "get it" while others will not. For those that aren't catching on to the intricacies of what we're trying to do, the instructors need to do more. Breakthroughs can happen with enough practice and the right words. Those 'right words' need to come from the instructor. Not everything we say will resonate the same with all clients, so we should constantly seek a better explanation. Or the most helpful discussion to have. Sometimes just reframing the Real Objective (Purpose) can have the impact that's needed. So reminding the client that we're seeking 'the path of most resistance' or that we're trying to create an 'intentional struggle' will get them to begin to see the qualitative side that we're seeking. Remember, this is a learning process for both sides. Just as the client can get better with their technique, we can get better with our observations and instruction. So be diligent in looking for new ways to communicate. This is also a surefire way to improve client retention.
Remember, it should be apparent to the client that their instructor cares more about the workout than they do!
Keep in mind, that on top of the 4 P's discussed in the module above, our clients will also need to be reminded to relax their face and jaw and to breathe freely. Oftentimes when a client holds their breath or tenses up their face, it is accompanied by a movement discrepancy, usually in the form of a heave or lunge or some sort of sudden movement. This again is evidence that they are operating instinctively under the ASSUMED OBJECTIVE (see glossary). The instructor needs to be attentive and proactive to anticipate these actions as we do not want them to become habitual. Remember, this is a journey and we are teaching our clients how to train Safely and Effectively. Therefore, we need to correct and instruct with this in mind. In fact, this cueing can be easily added in combination with other effort-based cues for those that are likely offenders. For instance, we can blend together, "head still...keep breathing...pull harder". So we have qualitative reminders with encouragement all in one, concise phrase. These combinations can be very useful especially if they are well timed. This is a great way for a novice instructor to evolve and grow - strive for cues that are meaningful, helpful, and timely.
If there was only one thing we could do to ensure the quality of a set of exercise, it would be to emphasize the Lower Turnaround!!! The simplest way to control a client's movement with the least amount of verbiage or cueing is to require strict, exaggerated control of the lower turnaround. This is easier said than done however as this tends to be the most challenging position mechanically on most exercises. And this is not to say that we should be using the least amount of cueing but rather to point out how much of the movement quality is entirely attributable to the execution of the lower turnaround.
We are responsible for the success of the client's workouts. We are the experts. If a client is struggling with control or if there's clear evidence that the load may be too heavy, adjust the weight. If they finish their set and comment that it "wasn't good" and you also noticed that it "wasn't good" please give them another opportunity to make it good. Now, we don't want to make a habit of doing more sets to make up for the lack of quality but if the weight is too heavy or the client is just having an off day, we should make the necessary adjustment so that they don't leave disappointed. It also gives us another chance to reinforce the concepts (4 P's maybe) that they are not grasping. Think of it as a fresh start where you can get a different level of engagement and focus from the client. Lower the weight, communicate your expectations, and challenge them to a more qualitative effort. Then take the opportunity to discuss how it went afterwards.
In conjunction with the other points listed, the instructor should be constantly evaluating the machine settings as we observe our client's training. This one may not be as obvious for a newer trainer, but there may be opportunities to optimize an exercise just based on the settings alone. When clients are injured or are dealing with discomfort in a joint, we are quick to modify the settings to ensure they can keep training. But there are instances where everything seems fine training-wise and there are no apparent issues that would require changing the settings. However, after a client has been on a machine and progressed in weight, their alignment may have changed. Also keep in mind that changing the settings may be used as a form of progression. For instance, if you have a client who just keeps increasing weight and reps on a leg press we may want to consider lowering the weight and creating a deeper lower turnaround. Just one setting deeper can make the exercise feel new again. Or maybe going from a more laid back position on leg press, which is more quadriceps biased to a more upright position, which is more hip biased. Sometimes just raising or lowering the seat on a chest press will create a better path and more leverage as the humerus adducts into the pectorals (SAME BUT DIFFERENT). One more example might be the relationship of the footplate and the femur restraint on the lumbar and abdominal. What tends to happen over time as the weights increase, the clients push harder into the footplate, which is to be expected. By pushing harder, they sink into the pads more and the knee is allowed to straighten further. Before you know it, the knee is no longer above the head of the femur at the hip, which is the positioning we want. In this case, we may find the need to bring the footplate in one setting closer. Along with that, the femur restraint will most likely need to come in closer too. This can only be found by the trainer squatting down during the client's set and observing the joint alignment.
Try not to involve the client at all with rep counts, weights, or the process of setting up of machines. They do not need to know any of this and it only complicates things for future workouts. Now obviously there are exceptions but be aware of unnecessary or rambling explanations and look to avoid them. Instead, use the time you are setting them up or loading/unloading to bring their awareness back to the REAL OBJECTIVE of resistance training. Give them feedback on what they just did or what they're about to do. Or teach them something about why we are cueing certain things or how a particular exercise will benefit them. Constantly reinforcing quality execution. This is a value-added way to continue to "sell" to them and position ourselves as experts. Anything else becomes confusing, noisy chatter and may give the client reasons to doubt our abilities.
There seems to be this pervasive thought among clients that we are in the position of being some sort of taskmaster and that they are being forced to lift more weight for more reps or even worse, "tortured". And it's always proclaimed in a lighthearted and playful manner, oftentimes between the clients as they interact in the lobby. In a way, it becomes something that they can bond (i.e. commiserate) over. Any attempt to remind them of our role and what we are really trying to accomplish is usually met with the customary, "Oh I know...I was kidding". But unfortunately, they still do not truly understand the nature of the relationship. Strength training has been scientifically proven to be one of the most valuable interventions one can partake in to improve health and longevity. But this training has to be of a high intensity and a near maximal effort, especially for those that are beyond the novice level. Just moving the machine and going through the motions is not enough to create an effect. The intensity required is not something most could ever accomplish on their own. Our clients should realize that this is an extremely challenging endeavor and that we are there to assist and ensure they are creating the desired stimulus.
"Did you add weight?" This is probably the most frequently asked client question. In some cases, you may decide that it's completely acceptable to answer with a 'yes' or 'no' to your more experienced clients. And even a newer client might be best advised to hear something along the lines of, "yes that was more weight this time, but we raise the weights for most of our clients over time as they learn how to do this." Importantly, we need to always remember to frame our response within the proper context of the REAL OBJECTIVE. So while they may have noticed the increased weight, what is more important is that we comment on their movement quality. Remind them that the weight is the least important of the variables and that adding weight is a last resort of progression. We are much more concerned and focused on their quality; proper posture, head still, face relaxed, gradual load up, breathing freely, controlled pace, continuous change of direction, increased breathing with effort, etc. All of these factors are more important to creating mechanical tension (i.e. the stimulus) than the weight itself. Remind them that they are attempting to maximize the tension in the muscles, which is a completely different experience than seeing how much they can lift. And that every repetition of every exercise is a chance to begin to master a skill that can quite literally transform their life.
"I don't know..." is a perfectly acceptable answer to a client's question. We are frequently seen as experts of all things health-related to our clients. Quite often we will get questions outside of the strength training realm that we may not have a logical answer to given the nature of our place on the health and fitness spectrum. We may even get questions that are strength training or anatomy related that we're not confident in answering. In either case, it is best to say something along the lines of, "Good question, I don't know the answer to that but I'll look into it." Then make sure you actually look into it and get back to the client with some sort of value added feedback. Either inquire with the rest of the team or do some online research. A true expert knows what they don't know and will admit to it rather than just purely speculating to appear knowledgeable. The clients will appreciate this as you will most likely be able to more intelligently answer their questions or at least point them in the right direction. This is yet another example of our competitive advantage. As strength training professionals, we don't give typical "personal trainer" answers using outdated "gym logic".
Teaching HOW to squeeze and when to say it. Keep in mind that when we instruct an uninformed trainee to "squeeze" they will most likely clench their fists. It's the instinctive action that is most familiar in this case. And because we are always wanting to add value to a workout, we should describe to the client exactly HOW to squeeze the muscles we are targeting. An example would be to instruct the subject to continuously attempt to straighten (or over-straighten) their knee in the contracted or extended position of the leg extension. This is how an advanced trainer will differentiate themselves from a typical trainer that simply tells the client to squeeze.
"I don't feel my [insert muscle group], am I doing it wrong?" This is another common question we will get from clients. And as trainers, we should consider ourselves fortunate that we are getting this feedback. This is another opportunity for us to prove our worth! Another opportunity for the client to become dependent on our insight. But our insight needs to be truthful and informative. It's too easy to be dismissive here and that's what most trainers would do. We need to have genuine concern for the client's inquiries. It may very well be that they just need more time and more practice with their focus and technique. Or the musculature that we're attempting to target just is not as sensitive as others. For instance, the lats are significantly less sensitive than the thighs or the triceps. We should be able to confidently explain this. At the end of the day, if we have the client properly positioned and the movement path is accurate, we can be assured that the targeted musculature is the prime mover. And this should be the informed and intelligent discussion we have with the client. The ability to mentally connect with a muscle or to feel the working muscle is usually muscle group specific and is more importantly highly individualized. But it can also be progressed and improved upon over the course of a training career. And this is where our focus should be anyway. Our clients should be encouraged to progress their effort, quality, and focus over time. The quantitative measures of weight and reps are essentially meaningless at the level our clients are at, they need to focus on the 4 P's and we should instruct accordingly!
Aside from asking “was that more weight?”, asking, “am I getting stronger?”, seems to be one of the more frequently asked questions.  And while we could simply answer yes or no…they would most likely require further explanation to satisfy them.  With this being the case, a little background information is necessary for perspective.
Firstly, anyone engaging in a properly designed, safely performed, progressively challenged strength training program can expect to get stronger.  This is especially true for those that haven't done any sort of strength training in the recent past.  So most assuredly we can answer “yes” to that inquiry.  But the reason they are asking must be because they are unaware themselves or need to be convinced.  This is an unfortunate occurrence.
It could be that the person asking lives a relatively inactive life, in which case they would not have an opportunity to notice or prove to themselves that they have in fact gotten stronger.  Again, this is unfortunate but probably not that uncommon.  But if this is the case, then any amount of strength training done with any level of intensity should represent a profound “wake up call” of sorts.  Or it could be that this particular individual is just physically unaware of themselves, which would tend to be the case for a good number of our clients as that is what possibly drew them to MSF in the first place.  In other words, they don’t know how to tell or measure their new levels of strength and want an objective measurement from the workout chart.  While the answer would be, “yes, you are lifting more weight than you did when you started,” that can be a little misleading.
It can almost be guaranteed that one will go on to lift more weight at MSF than when they first joined.  Part of the reason is because we will start conservatively with them, using significantly lighter weights than they are currently capable of lifting to facilitate the learning process.  It takes time and attention to learn how to properly strength train and our focus is always on the qualitative approach.  So the relative light weights that we start with will soon be surpassed as the client learns how to control their movement and effort.  In this case, it is likely that they have gotten stronger as the neurological adaptations alone that take place very quickly, on a rep-to-rep basis at times, are a big component of getting stronger.  On a side note, strength itself is not an adaptation, but rather an outcome.  There are 6 or more adaptations that go into making someone stronger of which neurological efficiency and muscle mass are two of the major ones.
Now in the case of an advanced client that has been training for 3 - 5 years or more, there is a chance that they have reached their genetic “ceiling” in terms of strength.  In fact everyone is likely to reach this point if they subject themselves to enough stimulus (i.e. training sessions).  But once we reach this point, it would make zero sense to stop training as we would then begin to lose our strength.  So it’s best to just keep training without concern for a genetic limit.  Just assume that it doesn’t even exist, keep training, and at least maintain as much strength as you can for the rest of your life.
All of that to say that the real bottleneck in all of this usually comes down to the willingness or tolerance of the client to produce a truly hard and adaptive effort.  When someone first begins a strength training program (or any physical activity for that matter), almost everything will be stimulative as it will be at a level above what they are currently used to.  However, as one gets stronger, the current level of effort will not be enough to surpass the newfound level of strength.  A harder, more intense effort is required to keep progressing.  This is a simple biological adaptation model.  The more someone has engaged in training, the higher the level of output is required to be stimulative.  But the good news is, with more training comes more ability and tolerance and skill.  The subject should be capable of training harder because of the practice of training and the instruction they receive.  This is the primary purpose of an Exercise Practitioner.  Aside from ensuring their safety of course.
There should be no doubt to the subject that they themselves have gotten stronger if they are consistently training with us and they are focused on their intensity and technique.  They should be able to feel the difference proper strength training makes by just standing there with an awareness.  If not and we need to point to other examples, we have gotten plenty of input over the years:
Posture
Less joint pain
Getting out of bed
Up and down stairs
Getting in and out of the car
Golfing
Carrying groceries
Lifting up children
Yardwork
Opening doors
Walking through stores or the neighborhood
Loading/unloading items from the trunk
Getting off the floor
Getting out of a chair
Lifting suitcase into overhead storage
All of these would be indicative of an increase in strength.  They are all also improved with practice as any physical endeavor is specific.  If one wants to get better at going up and down stairs or getting off the floor, these should be carefully practiced.  The strength increase will make all of those things easier but the point being that there is also a skill component.
So to sum up, yes, everyone that begins training with us will assuredly become stronger.  The question is, how much and to what degree?  And this is entirely up to the individual.  How seriously will they take their sessions and the instruction?  How much will they challenge themselves to get better at strength training?  The Instructor will not hold them back and they will even encourage, but ultimately it is up to the client to decide how hard they want to work over time.  In this way, they will not ever have to question whether they are getting stronger, they will give their body no choice.