Introduction
Posture, Pace, Path, Purpose - The Four P’s of Strength Training
The 4 P's - Posture, Pace, Path, Purpose - What to look for at a high level when instructing or performing proper resistance training.
POSTURE
Every exercise has a "get set" (i.e. starting position) and regardless of how long a client has been with us, we need to properly position them.  This can be as brief as a phrase or two or as involved as a detailed explanation if need be.  Newer clients will obviously need more instruction but even an advanced client might benefit from a reminder of "how" and "why" we should be positioned to avoid falling into casual rehearsed patterns.  Keep in mind, the more we can teach and explain our methods to a client the more likely we are to appear as experts and keep our clients engaged.  That reasoning aside, it is even more important from a safety and effectiveness standpoint to ensure the client is properly positioned.  An exercise is only ever as good as the setup and oftentimes the "get set" and the ability to maintain that posture throughout the movement determines what receives the loading and therefore the stimulus.  Regardless of what sensations are "felt" during the movement.  
A majority of our exercises are either performed with a "chest up" posture, so anterior pelvic tilt, or a poster pelvic tilt where the abdomen is held in the contracted position. Both of these postures should set the ribcage in a stable position, which means there should be no change in the position of the torso for the duration of the movement. Consider it part of the exercise and look to preemptively remind the clients during their execution of the exercise.
Also included under the Posture category is the idea of proper bracing.  Without proper bracing, the subject will not be able to continuously produce enough of a leveraged effort to create a stimulus.  This is also why maintaining proper posture and bracing throughout the set is just as important as being properly set up at the beginning of the exercise. The instructor should continue to cue proper posture and bracing during the movement.  Any sort of collapse, shifting, or wiggling poses an energy leak, which leads to a decreased output and unloading of targeted muscle groups.  And as we know, we need an increasing output and continuous tension over the course of a set, which is only possible through proper posture and bracing.  For an advanced subject, this becomes even more paramount in terms of attempting to truly progress. In the worst case scenario, any form of postural shift while under load can pose a risk of injury. This alone should be enough of a motivation to remain properly positioned and the trainer should warn of this to improve compliance.
As a general observation, if the subject can manage to keep their head and ribcage still (or the relationship between the head and ribcage constant), many of the other common discrepancies we see will take care of themselves and the targeted muscles will stand a better chance of experiencing mechanical tension.
PACE
A smooth, continuous speed of movement will help to ensure safe and effective resistance training.  Limiting momentum will allow us to use less weight and afford the client a better opportunity to exact control of the movement.  Keep in mind that the better a subject controls the weight, the more tension the muscles will experience.  This increased tension, while desirable for purposes of creating a stimulus, will also increase the subjects' perception of effort.  Most of our clients (and the general population for that matter) will associate this struggle and resulting perception of effort with an undesirable or overwhelming feeling.  But this "feeling" IS an indicator of the stimulus we seek. The event we're trying to create through resistance training is the very thing that our nervous systems instinctively looks to protect us from in the form of afferent feedback.  
So as fatigue begins to accumulate and the muscle's contraction velocity slows during an exercise (as evidenced by the machine's movement arm bogging down), the trainee experiences more and more discomfort.  The true challenge and focus should be to MAINTAIN THEIR PACE, which is only accomplished through an increasing effort (i.e. pushing or pulling harder).  So by encouraging and reinforcing the concept of maintaining their pace, we may be able to shift the focus from the accumulating discomfort and simplify the task of increasing one's effort. While it is important for us to remind our clients what the muscular target is in an exercise, this may be counterproductive as they approach muscular failure. A simple shift in focus to keeping a constant pace may allow the subject to push closer to failure with better quality.  
For those clients that are more intensity adverse, heavier loads and a faster pace (closer to 6 seconds than 10) may help minimize discomfort while still achieving the desired stimulus.  This should only be implemented to the degree that the client displays proper understanding and execution and should be introduced progressively. Newer trainees or those who are more deconditioned will most likely benefit from training with lighter loads and a slower pace.
So to summarize, a good way to teach our clients to train harder with more effort when it is needed most is to challenge them to maintain their pace throughout the set. This will actually require them to go from moving slowly at the onset to speeding up at some point during the exercise. The trainer needs to become acutely aware of this and be able to anticipate the need for proper instruction at the right time.
PATH
The next consideration in the 4 P's would be Path.  Path refers to the plane of motion, or movement pattern, followed by a limb, or in some cases the torso or head, during the execution of a given exercise. Because the body automatically detects and recruits the muscles with the best line of pull and leverage in a given body position, the path we use will determine what muscle fibers will be activated (neuromechanical matching). On certain exercises, the path may not be able to be varied or changed.  The more locked in or restrained a subject is, the less variability in the path of execution there can be (think lumbar extension for example).  But for many exercises, especially upper body movements, the limb's path will be a determining factor in the leverage or bias a particular muscle fiber has at a particular joint angle. This ultimately affects which muscle fibers actually receive the stimulus (tension).
Let's consider the compound row as an example.  If we begin a set by carrying the elbows out wide relative to the torso (abducted) and then begin to tuck the elbows closer to the torso as we fatigue (adduct), we are essentially performing a different exercise.  If our goal is to create as much tension in a muscle or muscle group then we want to keep those same muscles under continuous tension throughout the entire exercise.  By changing the angle of the arm/elbow we shift the tension away from the target to different muscles. Yes, the back muscles in general will still be loaded but the primary movers will change from the upper back to the lats.  
This is one of the more challenging aspects of proper training for a newer trainee to overcome.  Instinctively the body will attempt to find the path of least resistance.  The client will be operating under the premise of the assumed objective; to keep the machine moving as long as they can. In order to do this, they will need to unload what is fatiguing or uncomfortable and transfer the effort to other muscles. Again, this is a built-in feature of the body that acts as a protective mechanism to help ensure survival. In order for resistance training to be effective, one needs to learn to overcome this instinctive measure and be continuous with their effort. They must understand the muscles are still capable of producing force despite the discomfort they are experiencing.
 Here is another example where our communication, instruction, and preemptive cueing set us apart from other trainers that merely count reps.  We need to be able to anticipate the likely training discrepancies and help keep our clients in the safest and most beneficial positions to ensure successful workouts.  With our own practical training experience, we're able to put ourselves in the subjects' shoes on a moment-to-moment basis and give timely, objective, and informative instruction.
PURPOSE
The 4th and final P in our MSF Instructor "cheat sheet" is Purpose.  Simply stated, the purpose of training is to become more tolerant of training (and essentially, getting better at training).  This may very well be the missing ingredient to most attempts at a productive and successful exercise intervention. Purpose is essentially addressing the question, 'what is the primary or immediate goal of our exercise?'.  The technical answer to this is an increase in Motor Unit Recruitment (MUR), which leads to a greater number of muscle fibers exposed to mechanical tension, which leads to a more meaningful stimulus.  In order to increase MUR over time, the trainee must learn to train harder and be more tolerant of the effort required.  But this is not an instinctive measure for most.  Instinctively, most people are merely trying to hang-on or survive when they train. Instead, subjects would be better served to focus on maintaining their posture, their pace, and their path. Additionally, if the subject can learn to progress their intensity/effort while maintaining the other 3 P's they are well on their way to mastery. But how exactly do we teach a client to change their intent during such an arduous and uncomfortable task? The short answer is continual practice accompanied by timely instruction. And while Behavioral Science is an entirely different field of study that is beyond our expertise as instructors, we can lean on some basic principles. Rather than focusing on the discomfort or the struggle, the instructor should empower the client to focus on perfecting their exercise execution. This includes how well they organize their body and control the movement. In many ways our Continuous Tension protocol can be compared to practicing a martial art, where there is a strong qualitative and introspective approach. It's safe to say that for most, this attribute is missing from their exercise. The fight or flight instinct is extremely strong and well preserved in our species. It takes a concerted effort to try and overcome or at least temporarily "dupe" these mechanisms. And this understanding is another competitive advantage or differentiator that MSF Instructors hold over the rest of the industry. Our insight and our instruction provide meaningful value to our client's and their fitness journeys.
CONCLUSION
As you read through the MSF Academy you will come to learn that there are plenty of other factors to consider on our journey of mastering our craft as Exercise Practitioners. But these 4 principles should be constantly monitored and used to properly inform our clients to focus on a more qualitative effort. This is the key to productive high-intensity training.
By keeping mind the 4 P's of effective resistance training, and continuously instructing within this framework, we are better able to hold our clients accountable to their effort and quality. We are also more likely to achieve a level of consistency among trainers. And of even greater importance, by implementing the concepts discussed here and throughout the MSF Academy, we are given the opportunity to demonstrate to our clients that we care more about their workouts than they do. Our clients will feel as though they could not train this way or go through these workouts on their own. And at the end of the day, the success of our business is determined almost entirely by the clients' perceived quality of the workouts, which are performed one repetition at a time.
 **ALSO SEE THE MSF MASTERY SERIES FOR MORE INSIGHT INTO THE 4 P's OF RESISTANCE TRAINING AND OTHER QUALITATIVE TRAINING TOPICS.