Introduction
Glossary of Resistance Training Terminology
The following terms are used throughout the MaxStrength Fitness Academy and used by us throughout our day as Exercise Practitioners. It is therefore imperative for new team members to learn these EXACT terms and concepts and be comfortable using them during the on-boarding process and beyond. There are a lot of commonly held misconceptions used to talk about and describe exercise. In some cases it may be necessary for new team members to "unlearn" these misconceptions. We have a precise (and more accurate) way of understanding, discussing, and instructing exercise, and this is the language we use.
This also impacts our choice of words used to refer to our profession. Exercise Practitioner, Exercise Instructor (Instructor), Life Transformer, Strength Training Specialist (Strength Trainer or Trainer) are all acceptable descriptors for how we see ourselves and for what we do at MaxStrength Fitness. In an attempt to distinguish ourselves from an unqualified and over-saturated industry, we intentionally try to avoid titles like "Personal Trainer".
Assumed vs. Real Objective (of exercise) - arguably the most pervasive and most negatively impactful beliefs about resistance training is centered around the objective of resistance training itself. It seems to be widely accepted that the objective or goal of a strength training session (or set) should be to lift more weight for more reps, or to increase in some quantitative measure. When in reality, the objective should be to attempt to increase the stimulus achieved during a set of resistance training. This can occur as a result of lifting more weight or performing more reps but only if the quality of the execution of the exercise is maintained or improved upon. The stimulus we seek is an internal physiological response to the mechanical tension experienced during a physical effort and not necessarily dependent on external factors such as weight and reps. In other words, more weight or more reps do not automatically equal more stimulus. If there is more momentum present or the trainee is altering their form to lift the weight, the stimulus (tension) experienced by the targeted muscles is decreased. Intentional execution with a focus on control will create a safer and more effective stimulus. See also Progressive Overload and Intent.
Bone Density (Remodeling) - Bone remodeling is a dynamic process that involves the continuous renewal of bone tissue, influenced significantly by resistance training. When we engage in resistance exercise, the mechanical tension experienced by the muscle fibers is transferred as stress to the involved bones. This stress stimulates bone-forming cells called osteoblasts. These cells respond to the increased load by producing new bone matrix, thereby enhancing bone density and strength. Thus, resistance training not only enhances muscular strength but also plays a crucial role in fortifying the bones against the strains of daily activities and aging.
Concentric - the positive or lifting phase of a repetition (i.e. the actual lifting of the weight). During this phase, a muscle contracts or shortens, exerting a pulling force on the bones, to produce mechanical tension and ultimately movement about the joint(s) on which the muscle(s) acts. This concentric portion of a repetition is also the more challenging phase of the movement. In other words, a subject will always be able to lower more weight than they will be able to lift. This is an inherent safety mechanism in the body and is due to the friction in the overlapping or cross-bridging of the actin and myosin components of a shortened muscle fiber.
Continuous - the name of the protocol used to describe the technique or approach to resistance training used at MaxStrength Fitness is the Continuous Tension Method. Simply stated, once a set of exercise has begun, the musculature is under load and there are no points during the set where the muscles are unloaded (i.e. there is no rest). We seek to maintain continuous tension of the targeted muscle(s) for the duration of the set or until the subject reaches their maximum tolerable effort.
Contract(ion) - the muscular action whereby the actin and myosin components of a muscle fiber connect, overlap, and pull creating an overlapping or shortening of the muscle. This muscle shortening exerts a pulling force on the bones of the body and creates movement (or attempted movement). Muscular contractions are technically explained by the sliding filament theory in physiology. See also Concentric.
Eccentric - the negative or lowering phase of a repetition (i.e. lowering of the weight). During this phase, the contracted muscle begins to uncouple or lengthen. It is important to note that even though the muscle is lengthening during an eccentric action, there is still a contraction present and therefore tension is being produced. This is a result of the actin and myosin of the muscle fibers attempting to maintain their overlap while gradually releasing their connections. This is what gives control to the movement as opposed to just allowing the weight to free fall in the absence of force.  Additionally, because the eccentric phase requires a lower level of effort, it will feel easier to the subject.  This will likely cause the subject to unknowingly take longer during the eccentric to rest or to limit discomfort.  As a result, the instructor must be aware of this tendency and encourage the subject to maintain a constant pace throughout the movement.
Exercise Induced Headache (EIH) - Rare phenomenon where a small percentage of clients will get a strong headache during a set of exercise, usually the leg press. They are commonly described as originating in the back of the head/neck area, and if the effort continues, the pain makes its way to the front of the head, forming around one eye. Any occurrence of an EIH should be met with an abundance of caution and the client should stop the exercise immediately. Only resume when it has completely diminished. See the EIH module in the "Exercise Performance" section of the Academy for more guidance.
Failure (Fatigue) - the ultimate or eventual goal of most or our exercises. Traditionally, failure has been thought of as a mechanical term describing the inability of the involved muscles to continue to lift the load in a given exercise due to a mechanism of fatigue. But more realistically the inability to continue to produce effort comes down to the subject reaching what is known as their Maximum Tolerable Perception of Effort.  Essentially, the subject will choose to stop lifting a weight due to discomfort or perceived exertion prior to actual muscular failure. This is more accurately termed as "task failure," which is the inability to continue a task, and is the most common type of "movement failure".  Basically, subjects will voluntarily cease an exercise without having fully exhausted their true physical capabilities because of the perceived level of effort. While this is not necessarily optimal for strength training, it can still be stimulative and most importantly is an ability that can be improved upon over the course of a subject's resistance training career.  When exposed to these stresses/sensations, we become more tolerant of them.
Fatigue - having to do with a muscle's temporary and reversible reduction in exercise performance resulting from a previous bout of exercise. This is an objective measurement and when constructing an exercise program, every measure should be made to minimize the fatigue during the session as well as fatigue that is carried over from one session to the next. This is affected by a myriad of factors including but not limited to a trainee's experience level, current state of recovery from previous workout, discomfort experienced during current workout, perceived exertion, muscular soreness, and momentary weakening during an exercise (reduced MUR caused by calcium ion influx). Fatigue in this case does not refer to a subject's lack of readiness or energy levels. Any level of physiological fatigue present will act to decrease motor unit recruitment and mechanical tension thereby inhibiting the potential stimulative effect of resistance training. Each repetition of an exercise has an unavoidable "fatigue cost," and because of this, more reps (and more sets) will result in a higher level of physiological fatigue. This is a primary justification in support of a low volume, high intensity approach, which is the foundation of the MSF Continuous Tension protocol. Not to mention that higher reps and volume also lends itself to muscle fiber damage and inflammation which are inhibitory to the hypertrophy process. Similarly, exercises that emphasize an excessively lengthened (i.e. stretched) muscle position will create more fatigue than exercises that emphasize shortened positions.
Force - In physics, force is an influence tending to change the motion of a body or produce motion in a stationary body. The magnitude is calculated by multiplying the mass of the body by its acceleration. For our purposes, force can be explained simply as using one's physical strength against a resistance or simply stated as effort.
Force-Velocity Relationship - describes how a muscle's ability to produce force changes depending on the contraction velocity of the muscle fibers involved. In simple terms, when a muscle contracts quickly it produces less force per fiber. When a muscle contracts slowly, especially when involuntarily slow due to heavier loads and fatigue, it can produce more force. Only with a high level of effort (MUR) and an involuntarily slow contraction speed (Mechanical Tension) do we have the potential for a stimulative set of resistance training, especially the more/longer one trains. Keep in mind that with novice strength trainers, almost any level of effort can be stimulative because it is more than they are accustomed to.
Frequency - how often a workout takes place or more specifically, how often a muscle group (and more specifically muscle fiber) is trained, usually referring to a weekly time period. Most of our clients will train most of their muscle groups twice per week.
Gradual - taking place slowly or by degrees or increments. More specifically, when applying force to begin an exercise, it is our objective to do so gradually. So to begin pushing (exerting force) at a level lower than that required to move the selected load and incrementally push harder over time until movement occurs (i.e. the weight is lifted). This is one of the more important concepts that a trainee should understand and practice to perfect. Therefore, the instructor must fully understand this concept and be able to describe and observe that this is happening.
High Intensity - in the fitness realm, this descriptor refers to a type of exercise that is of a high level of effort. By definition, a high intensity activity cannot be carried out for a long period of time.  To say it another way, the higher the level of effort, the briefer the duration that that activity can be carried out.  This is to distinguish such an activity from lower level activities that most will identify with exercise, including walking, jogging, or aerobics. The Continuous Tension protocol used at MaxStrength Fitness is considered high intensity resistance training.
Inroad - the depth of momentary fatigue in a muscle or muscle group attained due to exercise. Keep in mind that while fatigue itself is not the stimulus we seek from exercise, it is an unavoidable byproduct of muscular work and mechanical tension. Inroad or fatigue is often used to explain the real objective of exercise but a more accurate description of the desired effect is the mechanical tension experienced by the working muscles.
Intensity - Intensity merely indicates how hard the muscular work or the degree of difficulty in the execution of an exercise. In general, the effectiveness of the muscular growth stimulus appears to be directly proportional to the intensity of muscular work (effort) during exercise.
Intent (Purpose) - In general terms, a trainee's true instinctive objective during a set of resistance training. This seems rather simple and straightforward on the surface but further introspection will reveal that for most trainee's, their intent is incongruent with that which leads to optimal results from resistance training. More than likely, a client's instincts will override their intent. This will turn into a desire to either keep the machine moving to "get more reps" or to altogether quit because they "can't get another rep." It's either a quantitative goal of getting more or a protective mechanism resulting from fight or flight while under duress. As a MSF Exercise Practitioner, there is an obligation to continually remind the client of the real objective of exercise and that their intent should be to create as much tension on the targeted muscle as possible. Proper intention will drive the behavior of the trainee and the execution of the exercise. On a more narrowly focused level, intent refers to a subject's desire to move faster on an exercise where fatigue is accumulating and therefore slowing, in an effort to maintain one's pace. See also Assumed vs. Real Objective and Speed.
Length-Tension Relationship - explains how a muscle fiber's ability to produce force changes depending on how stretched (lengthened) or contracted (shortened) it is. In simple terms, if a muscle is fully contracted or fully stretched, its force producing capabilities are diminished. This has to do with how a muscle fiber's actin and myosin heads overlap. When a muscle fiber is in the mid-to-long length position there is an optimal overlap and ideal leverage for them to grab and pull across each other (contract) most effectively. This helps to explain why we are stronger in certain points of a range of motion of an exercise than others.
Lower Turnaround (Lower Turn/Bottom) - the specific point in the execution of an exercise occurring at the end of the eccentric, or lowering phase, of the range of motion. The term "lower" is in reference to the position of the weight stack as it is being lowered. This is not to be confused with the position of the body during the movement. For example in the pulldown exercise, the lower turnaround would be when the arms (and movement arm of the machine) are at the highest point, further from the body. But this is the lower turnaround on this exercise because it is the end of the eccentric phase and the weight stack will be at its lowermost point.
Momentary Muscular Failure - training to the point where positive (concentric) movement is no longer possible due to the subject having reached their Maximum Tolerable Perception of Effort. This is also where the instructor would stop their count of the repetitions as only full reps, with full ROM and in the prescribed form are recorded. See also Failure and Fatigue for more.  Using the term “Full Effort” can be seen as a more user friendly way to discuss this with a client.
Motor Unit Recruitment (MUR) - a physiological process whereby the nervous system activates any number of motor units and the muscle fibers they innervate to meet a given level of effort from a working muscle. Not all motor units in a muscle are recruited during movement or exertion, only those required to complete the task. As the intensity of effort increases, so does motor unit recruitment (i.e. more muscle fibers are activated or innervated). They are also recruited in an orderly fashion, according to Henneman’s Size Principle, from the smallest, lower force producing fibers to the largest, higher force producing fibers depending on the momentary effort required. In order for a muscle fiber to be stimulated, it must first be activated/recruited. Importantly, if we are to create an adaptive stimulus from our resistance training, a higher level of motor unit recruitment would stimulate more muscle.  Therefore, a higher level of effort is recommended as a way to elicit a stronger response from the training.
Movement Pattern - a general descriptor for the path of motion required by the joints of the body on a given exercise. Examples of upper body movement patterns would be calling a chest press a horizontal push or a pull down a vertical pull. Or even more generally a "push" or a "pull". A lower body example would be calling a leg press a squat pattern or referring to a leg curl as knee flexion.
Negative - a less formal way to describe the lowering or eccentric phase of an exercise. Lowering the weight, as it refers to the weight stack, is the ‘negative’ phase of a repetition. Opposite of the lifting or positive phase of a repetition. Importantly, it requires less effort than the concentric phase and instructors should ensure subjects do not linger or stall during the eccentric phase.  They should maintain the same pace throughout the movement.  See also Eccentric.
Neural Adaptations - Initially, strength improvements on a given exercise or movement are largely attributed to enhanced communication and coordination between the brain and the muscles. This process involves increased efficiency in the recruitment of motor units, which are the nerve cells that signal a group of muscle fibers to contract. As you continue to train/practice a movement pattern, your central nervous system becomes better at activating a greater number of motor units simultaneously, thereby improving coordination and force output. These neural adaptations will necessarily precede the muscular adaptations that are the desired stimulus from resistance training. It is also important to note that neural adaptations usually occur relatively quickly and can actually happen rep to rep. It may only take a few workouts (i.e. sets) on a specific exercise to become neurologically proficient especially with a more stable, linear, bilateral movement pattern. For instance, the motor pattern for a leg press is more easily learned and adapted to than a dumbell lateral raise. See also Motor Unit Recruitment.
Pace - Refers to the speed of movement of an exercise. Our Continuous Tension Protocol dictates that a continuous, steady pace of approximately 6 to 10 seconds be employed for all movements. Furthermore, the established speed should not change unless instructed. This means lifting and lowering the resistance with the same speed. So if we lift the weight in 8 seconds, we should attempt to lower the weight in 8 seconds. The primary consideration for this exaggerated control is to ensure safety above all else. Sudden movement or rapid acceleration introduces excessive and potentially dangerous forces. Acceleration also reduces single fiber mechanical tension and therefore reduces the desired stimulus. Along with Posture, Path, and Purpose, Pace is part of the "4 P's" that an instructor should look for when observing and instructing a set of exercise. See also Speed.
Path - Refers to the line of travel of a limb or other body part on an exercise. For example, when performing a chest press exercise, what path are the arms (i.e. elbows) moving through? Because the shoulders and hands are fixed, the elbows are somewhat "free to float". We should seek consistent and symmetrical paths of movement on every exercise. Oftentimes when fatigue sets in, a trainee will change their arm path in an effort to keep the machine moving. Along with Posture, Pace, and Purpose, Path is part of the "4 P's" that an instructor should look for when observing and instructing a set of exercise.
Pelvic Tilt - the result of either contracting the abdominal muscles or extending the spine (lifting the chest). A posterior pelvic tilt is achieved by contracting the abdomen and rounding the spine. An anterior pelvic tilt occurs when the back is arched and the chest is lifted. During an anterior pelvic tilt the abdominal muscles are stretched or elongated. For most of the exercises performed, there will be a required posterior or anterior pelvic tilt required. This is a major component of the posture we refer to when instructing or describing an exercise.
Positive - a less formal way to describe the lifting or concentric phase of an exercise. Lifting the weight as it refers to the weight stack is the positive component of a repetition. Opposite of the lowering or negative phase of a repetition. See also Concentric.
Posture - how the client is expected to sit or position themselves on an exercise. And for most exercises, the trainee is expected to maintain this positioning at all times. Without establishing and maintaining a proper posture, the trainee will not be able to meaningfully direct their effort at a stimulative level. Exceptions to maintaining a posture would include the Lumbar Extension or Abdominal where the torso is expected to move and change positions during the exercise. But in these cases, there are still positional cues that should be given to ensure proper execution. The instructor should know how to properly position the client, instruct them how exactly to hold their posture, and watch for any form discrepancies during the set. Along with Pace and Path, Posture is part of the "4 P's" that an instructor should look for when observing and instructing a set of exercise.
Progressive Overload - a commonly misunderstood and misused term in the fitness community, Progressive Overload is NOT the idea that one should lift more weight or perform more reps or more sets in order to create a stimulus (i.e. get stronger). Instead, Progressive Overload is evidence that one has gotten stronger by the ability to perform more reps with the same weight or more weight for the same reps, under the SAME conditions. That last part is critical in that all conditions must be the same in order for the increased strength to be demonstrated. It must be the same exercise, at the same point in the workout (or at least not directly affected by the exercises before it), with the same settings, and using similar form and execution. If any of these other variables change, it may be a result of these changes that one appears to have gotten stronger. Importantly, as instructors, we should be fully informed on this and other fitness concepts but it may not be in our best interest as a business to discuss the actual weight and reps achieved by our clients. Our instruction and communication with our clients should be focused on more of a qualitative approach and less about the quantity. Yes, we want to encourage a high level of effort, and we'd like for our clients to get objectively stronger, but not without and emphasis on perfect form. An occasional acknowledgement of having increased the weight if the client asks is probably harmless, but be careful not to make these discussions a habit or to encourage chasing reps or weights. This will almost always result in the client pursuing the "assumed objective" which leads to improper and unsafe form.
Purpose - The 4th and final P in our MSF Instructor "cheat sheet" is Purpose. This may very well be the missing ingredient to most attempts at a productive and successful exercise intervention. Purpose is essentially addressing the question, 'what is the primary or immediate goal of our set of an exercise?'.  Most clients are simply trying to last as long as the trainer is requiring of them. Their instinctive mindset is that the workout is being done to them. The correct technical answer to the question 'what is the immediate goal of the workout?' is to increase Motor Unit Recruitment (MUR). Increasing MUR leads to a greater number of muscle fibers exposed to mechanical tension, which creates a more meaningful stimulus. In order to increase MUR, one would need to increase their momentary effort or simply train harder. So 'purpose' here is best described as the intent of the trainee to train with more effort, or to challenge themselves more, with each subsequent workout or set. Rather than having the trainer deliver the workout to them, the client should be an active participant with a long term goal of training harder. The instructor is there to help them learn and practice this most valuable skill.
Range of Motion (ROM) - can refer to both the distance of travel or excursion of a machine and the distance that the joints/limbs/torso of the trainee move during an exercise. In general, it is important to note that more range of motion is not necessarily better or more desirable. With safety our main priority, the instructor must ensure that the range of motion established is conservative, tolerable, and tailored to every individual client on every exercise. These concepts are discussed throughout the Academy and the onboarding process, as well as throughout the instructor's career as MSF.
Speed - a relative term usually referring to the actual pace of execution of an exercise. In the "fitness world," the speed we use at MSF of 6 to 10 seconds to lift the weight and 6 - 10 seconds to lower would be considered slow. While this may be an accurate depiction, it is necessary to ensure the safety of our clients, the proper execution of the exercises, and loading of the muscular structures. To take it a step further, when fatigue begins to accumulate on a movement and the subject voluntarily increases their effort, the body perceives this as an attempt to speed up. So the trainee's intent will actually be to move faster despite not being able to because of the fatigue. It is this effort and intent to keep one's pace despite the slowing movement that creates mechanical tension and ultimately the stimulus we seek from resistance training. See also Intent, Pace, and Tension.
Stretch - aside from the obvious meaning of the word stretch as most have come to the conclusion to describe the static act of lengthening a muscle, we have a slightly different use here. For our purposes, we refer to the stretched portion of a range of motion of an exercise as either exceeding the muscle's normal position/length at rest or the lengthening phase of movement. So during the lowering of a weight, or the eccentric, the muscle fibers are in fact lengthening as the degree of contraction is lessening.
Static Hold - a closely related method of static strength training to a Timed Static Contraction (TSC) but not as conservative, is the Static Hold (SH). While safer than dynamic exercise, it is potentially more risky than a TSC because during a Static Hold, the subject is actually holding or supporting a load. Whereas during a TSC, the subject is producing their own level of force against a movement arm that is locked in place and cannot be moved. Similar to the TSC, a Static Hold can be used in situations where a client is dealing with an injury, pain, discomfort, or a return from a surgical procedure. Static Holds have the benefit of objective feedback in the form of the load being held and the duration of the hold and as such, this method is more easily progressed. Additionally, since a Static Hold involves weight, there must be an interpersonal transfer of the load to and from the client, which requires extreme care and attention to detail. See the Static Hold module under the "Variations" section later in the Academy for more detail.
Tension (also Mechanical Tension or Muscular Tension) - refers to the degree or magnitude of stress experienced by activated muscle fibers under load. As a muscle contracts its muscle fibers grab and overlap along their length creating a pulling force on the bones/joints to which they are attached. Mechanical or muscular tension is the primary driving force, or stimulus, in the hypertrophic response that we seek from resistance training.
Timed Static Contraction (TSC) - as the name implies, a Timed Static Contraction (TSC) is an approach to strength training that involves producing an effort without movement. As such, it is typically safer than a dynamic exercise and can be a good option in situations where a client is dealing with an injury, pain, discomfort, or a return from a surgical procedure. The primary differentiator to a TSC is that there is no actual load being held or supported making it quite possibly the safest way to strength train. In order to perform a TSC, there needs to be an immovable movement arm to apply an effort against. This requires setting a given machine so that the movement arm is in the desired position of the range of motion and is held in place either by an amount of weight that cannot be lifted or with a selector pin that abuts the frame and prevents concentric movement. See the TSC module under the "Variations" section later in the Academy for more detail.
True Muscular Failure - training to the point where positive (concentric) movement is no longer possible due to muscular or central nervous system fatigue. While the phrase "true muscular failure" is still used in strength training circles is a technically inaccurate term. It is essentially impossible to recruit all of one's available muscle fibers and exhaust their strength through effort. It will most certainly come down to perceived effort, which happens well before true muscular failure. Nevertheless, it is worth acknowledging and distinguishing here as an instructor will likely hear this term at some point in their career. See also Failure and Fatigue for more.
Upper Turnaround (Upper Turn) - the specific point in the execution of an exercise signifying the end of the concentric, or lifting phase of the range of motion. The term "upper" is in reference to the position of the weight stack at the completion of the concentric phase of a given exercise repetition (i.e. it will be "lifted up"). This is not to be confused with the position of the body during the movement. For example, in the pulldown exercise the upper turnaround would be when the arms (and movement arm of the machine) are at the lowest point, closer to the body. But this is the upper turnaround because it is the end of the concentric phase and the weight stack will be at it's uppermost point. On certain exercises, the upper turnaround may also include what's known as an end stop.
Volume - in the strength training realm, volume usually refers to the amount of work performed in a workout. Some will use a basic formula of sets times reps and others may use weight times sets times reps. In any case, it is ultimately a misleading or even useless metric as not all reps in a workout are productive or stimulative. For our purposes we acknowledge the term volume as it relates to our use of a "low volume" protocol whereby we typically perform only one set per exercise and usually no more than 5 or 10 exercises in a session.
Equipment Nomenclature
Accessory stack - on machines with two weight stacks, the accessory stack is the smaller set of weights with smaller increments (usually 2, 2.5, or 5 pounds).
Add-ons - separate weights not included as part of the weight stack itself used to make smaller progressions. These should be kept on the floor nearby but completely out of the way of any traffic patterns or foot placement.
Axis of rotation - refers to both the pivot point of a movement arm on a machine and the acted upon joint in the body. It more accurately describes the axis on a single joint or rotary exercise where only one joint in the body is moving.
Bushing (oil impregnated bronze bushing) - refers to the small round "washer-like" part that acts as a cushion or liner for areas where metal passes through metal in order to reduce friction. In our case with the Imagine Strength equipment, most machines will have 4 of these, two for each of the weight stacks. There will be one bushing at the top of the frame of the weight stack and one at the bottom of the frame. These will be bronze in color and it is what the stack pin passes through. Every effort should be made to keep these junctions clean, with a thin film of lubricant on the stack pin. With use over time, the bushing will seep the oil and form to the stack pin to help maintain a friction free movement.
Carriage - essentially a larger 'movement arm' that encompasses or engages the torso, as seen on the Lumbar and Torso Rotation machines.
End Stop - a physical termination or abutment point strategically set on a machine that coincides with, or becomes, the upper turnaround in the execution of an exercise. The purpose of an end stop is to either prevent the limbs of the body from completely straightening and unloading, as would be used on a leg press, or to provide a point to apply effort against to increase the sensation of a muscular contraction, as could be used in a compound row or leg extension. In some cases, an end stop can be set to limit the range of motion of an exercise where a subject may be experiencing pain or that is contraindicated because of an injury. So for instance, if a client were to have shoulder pain closer to the lockout position of an overhead press, we could place a selector pin in the stack pin to create an end stop thereby preventing the client from lifting to full extension. See also Upper Turnaround.
Gap - the distance the movement arm is advanced before the weight is pinned on a selectorized machine. The gap is set to customize the lower turnaround on an exercise. The larger the gap that is used, the shorter the range of motion will be. A gap should be considered on most exercises for most clients to establish a safe and functional range of motion. For those trainees with an injury or some form of compromise, a properly set gap may allow them to use an exercise pain free that would otherwise be contraindicated.
Main stack - the primary weight stack on a machine with 2 weight stacks. The main stack will have the bigger plates with larger increments.
Movement Arm (or Work Arm) - the component or lever of the machine that is moved or lifted/lowered during the execution of an exercise. It will have either handles to grab or pads to push against when exercising. The movement arm then drives the weight stack through one or more articulations by either a lever(s), cable(s), or belt(s).
Range of Motion (of machine) - How far a machine's movement arm (and ultimately weight stack) moves during an exercise and the path that it tracks through. Most of the equipment we have will NOT be used through it's most fully possible range of motion. Each machine's range of motion should be customized to every individual client by using gaps and end stops to ensure safety and functionality. See also gap and end stop.
Selector pin - the pin used to select the amount of weight used on a given exercise. The selector pin goes under the weight and through a hole in the stack pin. See also stack pin.
Stack pin - the large metal rod that runs down through the center of the weight stack on a piece of selectorized equipment. The stack pin has holes in it that align with the holes in the weight plates that receive the selector pin when setting the weight to be used. Importantly, the stack should be kept clean with a lint free rag and a metal lubricant (TFL preferably) as needed but at least weekly. Where the stack pin passes through the bushings in the frame is one of the few possible points of friction and keeping the stack pin clean will help minimize this friction.