Lumb  pg 1 of 2
Lumbar Extension -  – Gap 4 (5 or 6 for back issues) - starts at LT, chest up
SETUP
Move footplate and femur restraint out of the way.  Unwind femur restraint to clear the knees if necessary.
Set seat and accessory weight stack only.
Move carriage to furthest back position to keep seat access clear.
“Carefully step over the frame and have a seat facing forward.”
“This exercise targets the muscles in your lower back.  You may also feel your glutes and hamstrings as those muscles contribute statically.”
“I am going to get you set up by moving the footplate and pads into place.”
Clear the way for the footplate by first moving the femur restraint toward the client.  It should be temporarily positioned so the pads are near their knees.
“OK, make sure you are all the way back in the seat as I bring the footplate closer to you.”
Move the footplate toward the client so that they may reach the platform without having to stretch.  The knee should be bent and positioned slightly higher relative to the hip joint.  There should be a downward slope of the femur from knee to hip.
“Place your feet up on the footplate about hip width apart.” (NOTE: Shorter clients will most likely have a higher foot placement.  Also consider using foot placement to achieve a knee angle that is congruent to the femur restraint pads).
Seat belt
Reposition the femur restraint and tighten down the pads so that they straddle the knee caps symmetrically.  Ensure the pads fall congruently on the tibia and femur.  Secure the pads to the point where they are snug with no gaps but still have ‘wiggle room’ when tested.
“Do you feel ok here?”
“Now I’m going to bring you forward into the starting position.”
While holding the handle of the carriage, remove the selector pin and carefully lower client into starting position to the desired gap.
LOAD UP + FIRST CONCENTRIC
“OK…hands on the handles, chin down, chest up…breathing freely, gradually begin to lift your ribcage putting pressure into the back pad.”
Observe closely, watching for a proper gradual load up.
Lumb pg 2 of 2
“Yes!  Now, SLIGHTLY speed up in order to stay smooth…keep that pace.”  (NOTE: Recall that if the client properly executes a gradual load up, they will most likely need to slightly speed up once they are moving.  Otherwise the pace will be too slow and the movement will become segmented).
UPPER TURN + PAUSE/SQUEEZE
“Chest up, back arched, all the way through if you can, keep arching…good, [click], ease out..don’t speed up.”
Watch closely to ensure the concentric has been fully completed. Some clients will be able to take the movement arm back to its furthest point, while others will have what appears to be a limited ROM.  Wherever that range of motion ends is where the pause/squeeze will take place.
There is also a tendency for the ROM to increase over the course of the first few repetitions due to an increase in mobility.  In this case, those first 1 or 2 reps can also be considered full ROM as they were all that could be comfortably achieved at that point.  Just ensure that if there is an apparent lack of ROM that it is not from a lack of understanding of what to do (i.e. lifting the chest/arching the back) or from excessive weight.
FIRST ECCENTRIC + LOWER TURN
“Head still…breathing freely…keep that pace.”
“Now as we approach the bottom, you are going to continuously change directions with no momentum.”  (Say this DURING the eccentric).
Let the client change directions, observe closely.
“Mmm, hmm, just like that!  Make it look the same every time!”
The client will be inclined to look at the weight stack on every LT, although not ideal, it’s probably fine on the first rep or two, after that and as they become more advanced they should look straight ahead.
Abs pg 1 of 2
Abdominals - Gap 5 for most (6 for back issues) – starts in contracted position w assist
SETUP
Move femur restraint out of the way and unwind, set seat, set weight, ensure movement arm (roller pad) is locked in place.
“Have a seat, please watch your head [point out roller pad]...feet up on the platform.”
Seat belt
“This exercise targets the abdominal muscles.”
Ensure feet are symmetrically positioned on the platform (NOTE: Depending on the clients leg length and need to achieve congruency with femur/tibia pads, the heels may hang off platform slightly).
Slide femur restraint toward client and tighten down the pads so that they straddle the knee caps symmetrically.  Ensure the pads fall congruently on the tibia and femur.  This may take some adjusting of the foot position.  Secure the pads to the point where they are snug with no gaps but still have ‘wiggle room’ when tested.
“Now please watch your head, bring your arms in, and lean back slightly as I bring the roller pad down to you.”
Carefully gain full control of the roller pad before releasing it from the locked position and guide it down into position in front of the client’s chest.
“You are going to bring your arms over top of the pad with your hands in a ‘prayer’ position…elbows in.”  Demonstrate hand and arm arrangement.
HANDOFF + FIRST ECCENTRIC
“OK…from here…looking straight ahead, arms firmly braced over roller pad, you are going to tighten your abdomen and help me as I assist you down into the contracted/’crunched’ position.  Keep in mind you want to try and round your back by curling down as opposed to leaning forward.”
Standing behind client, push the actual lever of the movement arm forward (not the roller pad) into position.
“Now, tighten those abdominal muscles hard, breathe freely…that…is…yours.”
Gradually hand over control of the weight using the interpersonal transfer techniques outlined in the academy.
“Maintain as much tightness as you can in your midsection as you begin to uncurl your torso/trunk/spine from the bottom up.”
“Let’s be ready to exaggerate the control of your change of direction…you’re going to touch and go continuously without pausing.”
Abs pg 2 of 2
LOWER TURN + FIRST CONCENTRIC + PAUSE/SQUEEZE
We have given them the timely cue and can now quietly watch their LT.
“Mmm, hmm…good…be continuous.”  (Note: if they did not properly execute the lower turn, instruct/correct on the eccentric of the next rep).
“Curling down, see how tightly you can contract your abdomen.”
“...right there…good, now try and get tighter..keep breathing…[click], ease out, don’t speed up.”  (NOTE: This is the “squeeze” technique that we refer to.  Recall that on the first two reps there is a brief pause of 1 to 2 seconds.  From the third rep on, there is a “squeeze” of 2 to 3 seconds.  The squeeze is just a slightly longer pause.  It’s used to establish control and to help create awareness of the working muscles.  The same cueing can be used for both the pause and the squeeze.  The duration of the pause on the first two reps is shorter with shorter phrasing.  The instruction on the squeeze is slightly longer with slightly drawn out instruction.)
SECOND ECCENTRIC
“Keep this pace, keep those abdominals tight, and be ready to seamlessly change directions.”
TR pg 1 of 2
Torso Rotation - No gap – starts at LT, midsection tight
SETUP
Set seat (1 or 2), set weight, set arm pads (^ or v), set the hip stabilizer pads (wide/narrow).
“Have a seat, butt back”
Seat belt
“Now I would like you to reach back and wrap your (L/R) arm over top of the roller pad.”
“Your other arm will be bent with your hand up and the outside of your arm up against the inside of the other roller pad.”
“Before we start the movement, set your feet flat and far enough apart that your legs make contact with the hip pads.”
This is how the client will ‘wedge’ themselves into the movement, both the upper body and the lower body.
“This exercise targets your midsection/core/abdomen, particularly your obliques, which are located on the sides of your torso.” [point to yourself to indicate]
LOAD UP + FIRST CONCENTRIC
“OK…from here…breathing freely, drive your knees out into the pads, and gradually begin to draw the roller pad into your torso while turning your ribcage to the (L/R).”
Observe the gradual load up.
“Mmm, hmm…good…now, SLIGHTLY speed up to stay smooth…maintain that pace.”  (NOTE: Recall that if the client properly executes a gradual load up, they may need to slightly speed up once they are moving.  Otherwise the pace will be too slow and the movement will become segmented)..
UPPER TURN + PAUSE/SQUEEZE
“Keep breathing, keep in mind that you are not necessarily seeing how far you can turn but rather how tight you can make your midsection…there…lock it in place, breathing…[click] ease out…don’t speed up.”
Watch closely to ensure the client has reached their fullest possible ROM.  Encourage them to “tighten down harder” or “keep still, do not flutter.”  ROM will vary greatly between clients and it’s important to remind them that turning further isn’t necessarily better.  What we are actually seeking is a tighter contraction of the midsection and in doing so, our ROM will be inherently limited to some extent.
TR pg 2 of 2
(NOTE: This is the “squeeze” technique that we refer to.  Recall that on the first two reps there is a brief pause of 1 to 2 seconds.  From the third rep on, there is a “squeeze” of 2 to 3 seconds.  The squeeze is just a slightly longer pause.  It’s used to establish control and to help create awareness of the working muscles.  The same cueing can be used for both the pause and the squeeze.  The duration of the pause on the first two reps is shorter with shorter phrasing.  The instruction on the squeeze is slightly longer with slightly drawn out instruction.)
FIRST ECCENTRIC + LOWER TURN
“Breathe freely, keep that pace…same speed in each direction.”
“OK, drag your way through the bottom here but DO NOT pause.”
Let the client change directions, observe closely.
“Perfect…stay wedged in with your legs and draw that (L/R) roller pad into you as you turn.”
Cx pg 1 of 2
Cervical Extension - No gap – handoff in neutral position, chest up
SETUP
Set seat, set back pad, set weight
“This exercise will target the muscles in your neck as well as the muscles all along your spine down into your lower back.”
Pull movement arm back to the neutral position.
“Have a seat facing out, hands on the handles, chest up.”
“Be mindful of your right arm and tuck your elbows in as the movement arm will pass close by your side as you perform this movement.”  Or for a client that is accustomed to this machine we can simply say, “elbows in, watch your right arm.”
Bring movement arm in closer to approximate the back of the client’s head.
HANDOFF + FIRST ECCENTRIC
“OK…from here…looking straight ahead, chest up, find the head pad, center your head and increase your force against it.”
Assist by locating the pad so that the crown of the head falls into the space in the head pad.  Gradually begin to reduce your force as you instruct the client to increase their force.  Also reference the interpersonal transfer outlined in the MSF Academy.
“Keep your chest up, bracing with your arms…increase your force…that…is…yours.”
If movement arm begins to move as you are attempting to handoff the weight, the client is not pushing hard enough.  Regain control and instruct the client to increase their force so that there is no movement during the transfer.
“Good…now you are going to maintain the same contact point on the head pad as you lower your head forward and down, try not to allow any sliding.”
It is critical that the client understands that they cannot take their own ‘path’ on this exercise but rather they must stay in the path of the machine.  This is a rotational movement, not linear.  There may be a tendency to want to move the head straight forward and straight back.  This is not acceptable and the instructor needs to watch attentively for this and anticipate the need to correct and/or regain control of the movement arm.
Another way to see/instruct this issue noted above, is that the chin or nose should be constantly moving down as you come forward (eccentric) and constantly moving up during the concentric. AND that the top of the head is essentially tracing an arch or a rainbow from front to back as the movement is performed.  Again, because it is rotational.
Cx pg 2 of 2
“See if you can lower far enough to allow those weights to touch.”
“Focus on how smoothly you can change directions as you touch and go without pausing.”
LOWER TURN + FIRST CONCENTRIC + PAUSE/SQUEEZE
We have given them the timely cue and can now attentively watch their LT.
“Mmm, hmm…good…lifting your chin, stay smooth.”  (Note: if they did not properly execute the lower turn, instruct/correct on the eccentric of the next rep).
“Chest up, back arched, keep following the movement back and down as far as you comfortably can.”
“Head to butt…butt to head.”
“...right there…good, now keep still..keep breathing…[click], ease out, don’t speed up.”  (NOTE: This is the “squeeze” technique that we refer to.  Recall that on the first two reps there is a brief pause of 1 to 2 seconds.  From the third rep on, there is a “squeeze” of 2 to 3 seconds.  The squeeze is just a slightly longer pause.  It’s used to establish control and to help create awareness of the working muscles.  The same cueing can be used for both the pause and the squeeze.  The duration of the pause on the first two reps is shorter with shorter phrasing.  The instruction on the squeeze is slightly longer with slightly drawn out instruction.)
SECOND ECCENTRIC
“Keep this pace, stay in the path of the machine (or alternatively, maintain consistent contact with the head pad), and be ready to seamlessly change directions.”
NOTE: SIMILAR TO THE LUMBAR MACHINE, THIS EXERCISE IS NEVER TAKEN TO FAILURE.  BE PREPARED TO END THE SET ‘TOO EARLY’ RATHER THAN ‘TOO LATE’.  STAY ATTENTIVE AND WATCH FOR FEEDBACK SO AS NOT TO CAUSE EXCESSIVE STRAIN TO THE DELICATE STRUCTURES OF THE NECK/SPINE.
ALSO CONSIDER PERFORMING THIS EXERCISE AS A STATIC HOLD JUST BEYOND THE MID POINT OF THE MOVEMENT.  START CONSERVATIVELY (LIGHT WEIGHT, SHORTER DURATIONS OF 30 - 45 SECONDS) AND PROGRESS SLOWLY ASKING FOR FEEDBACK FROM CLIENT.  SEE MSF ACADEMY FOR MORE DETAILS.