Variations of the Continuous Tension Protocol
Static Hold (SH)
A closely related method of static strength training to a Timed Static Contraction (TSC) but not as conservative is the Static Hold (SH). While safer than dynamic exercise, it is potentially more risky than a TSC because during a Static Hold, the subject is actually holding or supporting a load. Whereas during a TSC, the subject is producing their own level of force against a movement arm that is locked in place and cannot be moved. Similar to the TSC, a SH can be used in situations where a client is dealing with an injury, pain, discomfort, or a return from a surgical procedure. In some cases, it will be better to let a particular joint or muscle heal or for discomfort to subside before attempting to strength train the area. These are typically the more acute variety of injury where there may be some swelling and/or the client has not yet gotten a medical diagnosis. But in situations where there has been chronic or lingering discomfort, AND where there is NO medically advised contraindication to activity, the introduction of careful, static exercise may actually help.
Static Holds have the benefit of objective feedback in the form of the load being held and the duration of the hold and as such, this method is more easily progressed. But as stated above it is inherently more risky because of this fact. When we actually load the exercise, the client cannot simply use a level of force they are comfortable with, instead they will have to produce a level of force at least high enough to hold or support the load selected. If its a client that has been training with us for a period of time and that has maybe even used the machine dynamically in the past, a reasonable weight selection will be easier to determine. In any case, a discussion with a more senior instructor and/or MSF Corporate is suggested as an extra precaution.
In addition to the weight and duration components to be determined, the highest level of attention must be given to the interpersonal transfer of the load from instructor to client. This is another element of risk that must be managed during a Static Hold that is not a concern during a TSC. During an interpersonal loading transfer, the instructor must first bring the movement arm into position, which is usually near the midpoint on most exercises.  The instructor then guides the client to engage the movement arm with the proper part of the body.  After affirming proper alignment with the machine, the trainer will instruct the client to begin applying gradual force to the movement arm while the trainer begins to lessen his or her force.  The instructor then gradually “hands off” the resistance entirely to the client and pinpoints the completion of the transfer with a clear, concise signal of “yours”.
Static holds for uninjured and otherwise healthy subjects are typically performed with slightly more resistance (+10 to 20%) than the subject would use for a dynamic set.  Less weight should be used if we are dealing with an injured or compromised joint. Because of our priority on safety a conservative approach should always be taken. We would much rather use a load that is too light and gradually increase over time than use a load that is too heavy and potentially injurious.
When determining the static position for the movement arm the instructor must consider and assess where along the range of motion any discomfort or pain may arise. We obviously want to avoid these joint angles at all costs. If a pain free position cannot be found, then we should not choose that particular machine or movement pattern. Furthermore, it is generally safer to use a position that is somewhere near the midpoint of an exercise. The end ranges of motion where the client is either in a lengthened muscle position (i.e. stretched) or a shortened muscle position (i.e. contracted) should be avoided. These positions tend to be either poorly leveraged or overly leveraged and as a result are not as safe. Somewhere near each individual client's midpoint is a safe "starting point" to consider. For single joint exercises and compound pulling movements, it may be beneficial to position the movement arm just beyond the midpoint of the range of motion. So biased toward a slightly more contracted position as the force capabilities diminish in this direction making the exercise inherently safer. In addition, a more contracted position will enhance the "feeling" in the working muscles. And while the sensation of the contraction is not necessarily stimulative, there tends to be a benefit to the mental connection in terms of motor unit recruitment and therefore overall effectiveness of the exercise. If possible, the instructor should look to create a hard end stop for the subject to apply their effort against. This is accomplished by placing the selector pin in the stack pin where the selector pin will abut the frame of the weight stack and prevent any further concentric movement. This location will then be recorded in the chart to allow for standardization.
How To Instruct a Static Hold:
During a Static Hold the instructor assists the movement arm (load) to a point in the range of motion where the targeted muscles are loaded and the subject is pain free (see last paragraph for how to configure the machine for use of heavier loads). Ideally this will be somewhere near the client's midpoint of the range of motion. If possible, it is advised that the instructor use a selector pin in the stack pin to create an end stop to apply force against.  From this point, the instructor carefully transfers the load over to the client who then attempts to hold that joint angle stationary for time creating tension in the targeted musculature.  Failure is achieved when the trainee is unable to prevent negative movement within the constraints of proper form and proper breathing. When first introducing a Static Hold however, the instructor may be advised to avoid true muscular failure and instead look to achieve a time goal of somewhere between 45 to 90 seconds. We should always introduce different exercises and techniques conservatively, especially to a more intensity adverse subject or those with a more recent injury or surgical procedure. With practice and tolerance, the instructor can increase the challenge for the client by increasing load and/or duration but usually not to exceed 120 seconds.
Once the desired duration is achieved, be prepared to take the load away from the client by performing the interpersonal transfer from client to instructor. If the load is considerably heavy to manually control, the machine can be configured so that the distance moved to lift and lower the weight is minimal. This can be accomplished by increasing the gap to the point just before we are to have the client hold the weight. This way the load will only have to be moved an inch or two to lift and lower and the instructor will be spared from having to lift an excessive load. Please consult with MSF Corp or see the video section for more details.