Variations of the Continuous Tension Protocol
Forced Reps
NOTE: This technique should be used RARELY and only by a seasoned instructor. There is risk to both the client and the trainer in this situation and an abundance of caution is required. Please discuss with your Studio Leader or MSF Corporate if you are considering this for a particular client.
The most overused “set-extension” technique is the forced rep. This is because of the ease of temptation for its use by any and all trainers. It would seem harmless to employ on the surface but can lead to a dependency, degradation of quality, or injury.  As such, forced reps should be a last resort as a means to increase intensity. In some cases a forced rep will keep a client engaged in a set where they would have otherwise reached their maximum tolerable perception of effort and essentially stopping their effort. Their will be temptation on the instructors part to keep the client working but it cannot be stated enough that this technique should not become commonplace. It would be more ideal for the instructor should use encouragement to get the client to increase their effort and push through the sticking point. It would also be more beneficial for the client to understand the need to increase their effort by way of their own volition. This will help them more in the long run as we take them through their life long journey of strength training by using teachable moments.
In any event, if the experienced has decided to use the forced rep technique, they should fully understand how and when to apply it. To perform a forced rep, the instructor applies just enough additional force to assist the trainee in completing the positive phase of the repetition.  Once the client has gotten beyond the theoretical “sticking point”, the instructor seamlessly transfers the resistance back to the trainee to continue the repetition themselves.  If performed properly the subject should not even notice the assist.  It must be reiterated here that forced reps should only be used occasionally if not rarely as the subject will become dependent on or expectant of the assist.  This has a tendency to create bad habits and faulty muscular loading patterns.  Importantly, only an experienced instructor should consider this technique after acquiring the proper skill and developing keen judgement for its use.