Variations of the Continuous Tension Protocol
Timed Static Contractions (TSC)
As the name implies, a Timed Static Contraction (TSC) is an approach to strength training that involves applying an effort without movement. As such, it is typically safer than a dynamic exercise and can be a good option in situations where a client is dealing with an injury, pain, discomfort, or a return from a surgical procedure. In some cases, it will be better to let a particular joint or muscle heal or for discomfort to subside before attempting to strength train the area. These are typically the more acute variety of injury where there may be some swelling and/or the client has not yet gotten a medical diagnosis. But in situations where there has been chronic or lingering discomfort, AND where there is NO medically advised contraindication to activity, the introduction of careful, static exercise may actually help.
For those clients returning from a surgical procedure (e.g. joint replacement, ligament repair, meniscus procedure, etc), there will usually be a prescribed amount of physical therapy. If the client has not yet finished their physical therapy and therefore does not have medical clearance, we WILL NOT TRAIN OR INVOLVE THE AFFECTED AREA. This is the job of the doctors and physical therapists. They will restore the client back to their normal/acceptable capabilities and we should not disrupt this process. The client may still return to their training with MSF, but we will train around the area and employ additional precautionary measures in selecting movements to ensure the client's safety.
An important distinction between a TSC and a Static Hold (SH), is that with a TSC there is no actual load being held or supported making it quite possibly the safest way to strength train. In order to perform a TSC, there needs to be an immovable movement arm to apply an effort against. This requires setting a given machine so that the movement arm is in the desired position of the range of motion and is held in place either by an amount of weight that cannot be lifted or with a selector pin that abuts the frame and prevents concentric movement.
When determining the static position for the movement arm the instructor must consider and assess where along the range of motion any discomfort or pain may arise. We obviously want to avoid these joint angles at all costs. If a pain free position cannot be found, then we should not choose that particular machine or movement pattern. Furthermore, it is generally safer to use a position that is somewhere near the midpoint of an exercise. The end ranges of motion where the client is either in a lengthened muscle position (i.e. stretched) or a shortened muscle position (i.e. contracted) should be avoided. These positions tend to be either poorly leveraged or overly leveraged and as a result are not as safe. Somewhere near each individual client's midpoint is a safe "starting point" to consider. For single joint exercises and compound pulling movements, it may be beneficial to position the movement arm just beyond the midpoint of the range of motion. So biased toward a slightly more contracted position as the force capabilities diminish in this direction making the exercise inherently safer. In addition, a more contracted position will enhance the "feeling" in the working muscles. And while the sensation of the contraction is not necessarily stimulative, there tends to be a benefit to the mental connection in terms of motor unit recruitment and therefore overall effectiveness of the exercise.
How To Instruct a TSC:
The standard approach is an isometric effort applied for a continuous duration of 90 seconds.  This duration is divided into three 30-second intervals. Importantly, if we are instructing an intensity adverse client or one that has a recent injured or repaired joint, the duration used may be shortened. In some cases, intervals as brief as 10 seconds will be the optimal approach for a total of 30 seconds (note: we can use 15, 20, 25-second intervals as well). Safety is always the primary concern and a more conservative introduction of this special method should be considered and discussed internally with the Studio Leader or with MSF Corp.
Regardless of the duration chosen, the instruction and progression through the set will be the same. The first interval is applied with a 50% effort ("Moderate Effort"), the second interval is applied with a 75% effort ("Almost as hard as you can"), and the third with a 100% effort (As hard as you can!"). For this to work properly, the force applied throughout the duration of the exercise must be constant and steady within each interval. The effectiveness, and possibly safety, are diminished if the effort is segmented or applied haphazardly. That makes the instruction even more critical in this situation.
Oftentimes clients will overshoot the beginning of the movement and apply too intense of an effort, which will lead to them having to back off. Then we instruct to increase at the next interval resulting in a situation where there is an inconsistent or undulating on and off sort of effect that obviates the premise of a TSC. We should aim to start the effort slight and build to the greatest effort possible by the end, with a carefully controlled, ever increasing output over the duration. This, like any approach to a physical endeavor, takes practice and it would be better to "under estimate" on the first few attempts to ensure that a gradual increase on the targeted musculature is maintained.
By the time the subject reaches the third interval, their strength is greatly reduced by the first two intervals.  Therefore, their ability to produce force is diminished and the now 100% effort required is drastically reduced from what it would be if they were at full strength.  This is what contributes to the safety of both the TSC and our MSF Continuous Tension protocol.  During TSC, there is no actual load being lifted or supported. As discussed above, this works particularly well for clients with injuries or varying degrees of pain/discomfort as it is the most conservative approach to resistance training.  TSC might also help subjects learn to better control and direct their effort with less extraneous muscular involvement.  It can also be used to help break the common Valsalva synch.  This is due to the fact that muscular and neurological control of dynamic exercise/movement is much more complex than static contraction.
In general, a static approach should almost always be seen as a temporary "bridge" to dynamic exercise. Most people will benefit more from moving during their exercise than they will training statically. Nevertheless, it remains a viable tool in certain situations. If a trainer is not 100% certain on how or when to implement a TSC, they should discuss with their Studio Leader or MSF Corporate for clarification. Static Holds, a closely related method of static exercise are outlined in the following module.